# Chapter 18: Muscular Contraction and Movement

18
 Muscular Contraction and Movement








OBJECTIVES




After studying the chapter, you should be able to:






Differentiate between force and load.






Identify the different types of muscle contraction and the terms to describe muscle fiber contraction or whole-muscle contraction.






Compare and contrast concentric and eccentric dynamic contractions.






Describe neural and mechanical factors that affect force development.






Differentiate between the length-tension relationship as it applies to a muscle fiber and as it applies to a whole muscle.






Identify possible causes of muscle fatigue, and indicate the most probable cause of muscle fatigue for various types of activities.






Outline the integrated model of delayed-onset muscle soreness and explain why DOMS can be a concern.






Refute the popular belief that delayed-onset muscle soreness is caused by an accumulation of lactic acid in the muscle.






Identify the different laboratory and field methods for measuring muscular function.






Describe the basic pattern of strength development.






Compare and contrast the expression of strength in males and females.






Describe the impact of age on strength expression in children/adolescents and older adults, and explain the factors affecting older adults.








Introduction: Exercise—the Result of Muscle Contraction




Dictionaries generally define exercise as an activity performed using muscles. In other words, the contraction of muscles is exercise. Therefore, it is impossible to discuss the exercise response of the neuromuscular system in the same way that it is discussed for the cardiovascular-respiratory or metabolic systems.



Although not all muscle action results in exercise, all exercise is done by muscle action. An almost endless number of exercises result from the many ways different body muscles can contract. For example, imagine a basketball player taking off from the foul line for a slam dunk, a bodybuilder flexing in a pose, a swimmer doing a front crawl stroke, and the movement of your eyes across the pages of this book. All of these activities require different muscle actions—explosive dynamic power; controlled static activity; force against a resistance through a large range of motion; and highly coordinated, rapid, but minimal force movement. Although the individual actions involving muscle contractions vary widely, they can be classified in general ways. These classifications help us understand differences in how muscle contractions produce force.





Muscular Force Production




Tension versus Load


The force developed when a contracting muscle acts on an object is called muscle tension
. The force exerted on the muscle by the object is called the load
. The load and muscle tension are opposing forces.



The term
 contraction
 refers to the tension-producing process of the contractile elements within muscle. However, not all contractions produce movement; movement depends on the magnitude of the load exerted and the tension produced by the muscle. In order for a muscle to move a load, the force of muscle tension must exceed the force of the load. Furthermore, muscle tension developed experimentally in an isolated muscle fiber, a motor unit, or even a whole muscle is not necessarily the same as the force developed by an intact muscle in the human body.




All human motion involves rotation of body segments about their joint axes. The capability of a force to produce rotation is referred to as
 torque
. Thus, torque is force applied at some distance away from the center of the joint, causing the limb to rotate around the joint. Torque changes as a muscle moves bone through the range of motion.






Muscle Tension
 Force developed when a contracting muscle acts on an object.



Load
 Force exerted on the muscle.



Contraction
 Tension-producing process of the contractile elements within muscle.



Torque
 The capability of a force to produce rotation of a limb around a joint.



Isotonic Contraction
 A muscle fiber contraction in which the tension generated by the muscle fiber is constant through the range of motion.



Dynamic Contraction
 A muscle contraction in which the force exerted varies as the muscle shortens to accommodate change in muscle length and/or joint angle throughout the range of motion while moving a constant external load.



Concentric Contraction
 A dynamic muscle contraction that produces tension during shortening.




Classification of Muscle Contractions


A classification of muscle contractions is presented in Table 18.1
. This classification is based on three component characteristics: time (as duration and/or velocity), displacement (length change), and force production. Throughout this discussion, it is important to distinguish whether a contraction is being described in an isolated muscle fiber/motor unit or in intact, whole muscles.



TABLE 18.1
 Classification of Contractions








Note: ROM, range of motion.


Sources: Komi (1984); Williams (1994).





As shown in
 
Table 18.1

, at the muscle fiber or motor unit level, the three basic types of contraction are isotonic, isokinetic, and isometric. At the whole-muscle level, contractions may be defined as dynamic, isokinematic, or static. The following paragraphs describe these different contractions in a muscle fiber and the corresponding types of contraction in an intact muscle.




An
 isotonic contraction
 is a muscle fiber contraction in which the tension generated by the muscle fiber is constant throughout the range of motion. The term isotonic indicates that the force production (tonus) is unchanged (iso means “same”) when the muscle fiber contracts, causing movement of an external load. In the intact human system, such a contraction is practically impossible. What happens in intact whole muscle is that the muscle force varies as the muscle contracts. This variation is necessary to accommodate changes in muscle length and/or joint angles as limbs move through their ranges of motion. Thus, the load is constant, but the force produced to move it through the range of motion is not. Therefore, the term dynamic is more accurate to describe contraction within the intact human.




A
 dynamic contraction
 is a whole-muscle contraction that produces movement of the skeleton. If the movement results from a dynamic muscle contraction that produces tension during shortening, it is a
 concentric contraction
. Concentric contractions result in positive external work and are primarily responsible for acceleration in movement. The lifting action of the biceps in curling a barbell is an example of a concentric dynamic contraction. The sliding filament theory describes this type of contraction (see
 
Chapter 17

)

.




If movement occurs as a result of a dynamic muscle contraction that produces tension while lengthening, the contraction is referred to as an
 eccentric contraction
. Eccentric contractions result in negative work and are primarily responsible for deceleration in movement. The lowering action of the biceps in curling a barbell is an example of an eccentric dynamic contraction. During an eccentric contraction, the cross-bridges are cycling as the filaments are being pulled apart. Because of this action of being pulled apart, strenuous eccentric activities can cause mechanical disruption of the sarcomeres, muscle damage, and soreness (

Peake et al., 2005

). Strenuous eccentric contractions also allow for a greater force of contraction at a lower energy cost than do concentric contractions (

Stauber, 1989

). Skeletal muscle fibers produce 1.5–1.9 times more force during maximal eccentric contraction than during maximal isometric contraction, whereas an eccentric contraction in whole muscle is slightly greater than a concentric contraction (

Aagaard and Bangsbo, 2006

;
 
Byrne et al., 2004

).






Eccentric Contraction
 A dynamic muscle contraction that produces tension (force) while lengthening.



Isokinetic Contraction
 A muscle fiber contraction in which the velocity of the contraction is kept constant.



Isokinematic Contraction
 A muscle contraction in which the rate of limb displacement or joint rotation is held constant with the use of specialized equipment.



Isometric Contraction
 A muscle fiber contraction that does not result in a length change in muscle fiber.





Why can an eccentric contraction produce more force than a concentric one? During a concentric contraction, only about half of the available cross-bridges cycle. During an eccentric contraction, some of the cross-bridges do not cycle but are continually pulled backward. Because of this, the myosin heads do not rotate forward, and the actin and myosin remain bound (

Stauber, 1989

). As the contraction continues, a number of additional cross-bridges are formed that may exceed the number of cross-bridges in a concentric contraction. Hence, more tension can be produced.




Why does eccentric (negative) work have a lower energy cost than does concentric (positive) work? The answer to this question is not completely known, but two possibilities have been suggested (

Stauber, 1989

). First, fewer muscle fibers are recruited during eccentric contractions than during concentric contractions; fewer fibers use less oxygen, which translates to a smaller energy cost. Second, because some of the cross-bridges do not cycle, less ATP is broken down and used as energy. Researchers estimate that positive work uses three to nine times more energy than does negative work. To appreciate the applicability of this information, mentally compare climbing up stairs in a high-rise building with walking down them.




An
 isokinetic contraction
 is a muscle fiber contraction in which the velocity of contraction is kept constant. Isokinetic contractions are also dynamic contractions in that movement occurs; the force generated is sufficient to overcome the external load. In the intact human, the velocity of the movement actually varies with the joint angle; however, the rate of limb displacement can be held constant with special exercise equipment. Hence, the term
 isokinematic contraction
 is more technically correct, although seldom used. What differentiates isokinetic contractions from other forms of dynamic contractions is that the rate of shortening or lengthening (kinesis means “motion”) is constant (iso means “same”).




An
 isometric contraction
 is a muscle fiber contraction without a length change in the muscle fiber. In an

 isometric contraction, the cross-bridges are cycling—hence producing tension—but sliding of the filaments does not occur. The actual length (metric derives from meter and refers to length) is constant. This kind of action is possible in an isolated fiber because the fiber can be stabilized at both ends in an experimental apparatus before being stimulated. However, an intact fiber has an elastic element (connective tissue and joints) to contend with, and so some fiber shortening actually does occur even though no limb displacement or joint rotation occurs. A
 static contraction
 is a muscle contraction that produces an increase in muscle tension but does not cause meaningful limb displacement or joint rotation and therefore does not result in movement of the skeleton. Thus, the term static, meaning “not in motion,” is better than isometric for describing such a contraction that occurs in an intact muscle in humans. No external work is done by static contractions, but they often perform the important task of fixation or stabilization. Gripping a tennis racket or barbell is an example of a static contraction.






Static Contraction
 A muscle contraction that produces an increase in muscle tension but does not cause meaningful limb displacement or joint displacement and therefore does not result in movement of the skeleton.




Force Development


All types of contractions exert tension; however, the amount of tension that can be generated is not the same for all contractions. In whole muscles, eccentric dynamic contractions produce the greatest force, followed by static contractions and then by dynamic concentric contractions.



The amount of force produced by each type of contraction depends on neural and mechanical factors (

Komi, 1984

). This is true on the level of the muscle fiber and also in the intact, whole muscle. The following sections discuss how neural and mechanical factors influence force development. Each section first discusses the muscle fiber and then the more complex environment of whole muscles.



Neural Activation


A single muscle fiber or motor unit that is stimulated to contract will contract maximally or not at all (according to the all-or-none principle of muscle contraction described in Chapter 17
). When stimulated, a muscle fiber produces a twitch
 and then relaxes (Figure 18.1A
). If a second stimulus is applied before the fiber has completely relaxed,
 temporal summation
 results, producing slightly greater tension. If the frequency of stimulation is increased enough to prohibit relaxation, the individual contractions blend together to form first an irregular
 (or unfused
) tetanus
 and then a smooth
 (fused
) tetanus
 (Figure 18.1B
). Unfused tetanic contractions produce greater tension than do either single twitches or summations, and fused tetanic contractions produce the highest tension.









FIGURE 18.1
 Muscle Response to Stimulation.
 A.
 Myogram of a single muscle fiber twitch. B.
 Myogram of a series of muscle fiber twitches. C.
 Effect of frequency of stimulation on muscle tension in whole muscle. D
. Firing rate and muscle tension in different fiber types in whole muscle. SO, slow oxidative; FOG, fast oxidative glycolytic; FG, fast glycolytic.





In intact muscle, contractions occur with tetanic contractions of motor units. Unlike single muscle fiber or motor unit contractions, whole-muscle contractions do not occur in an all-or-none fashion. Whole-muscle contractions can be graded, meaning a muscle contraction can produce little force (for instance, to move your hand while turning a page) or a lot of force (for instance, to lift a heavy barbell). Two neural factors determine force production in whole muscle. The first factor is the frequency of stimulation, or
 rate coding
 (

Enoka, 1988

). As shown in
 
Figure 18.1C

, as the frequency of stimulation increases, so does the force that the muscle produces. Notice that at frequencies less than 50 Hz, a small increase in frequency of firing can produce a large increase in muscle tension (

Sale, 1992

).




The second neural way of controlling force output is by varying the number of motor units activated, which is called recruitment, or
 number coding
. In the intact human, some motor units are always contracting in an alternating manner. These contractions maintain what is called
 muscle tone
, or
 tonus
. When greater tension is needed, the processes of rate coding and number coding occur in tandem. As the firing of a given motor unit reaches its maximum, new motor units are recruited. Such activation or recruitment, and the subsequent deactivation or derecruitment, occurs according to the size principle. Remember that smaller motor neurons are easier to stimulate than larger ones. Therefore, in accordance with the size principle, the small α
2
 motor neurons innervating slow oxidative (SO) motor units are recruited first (

Figure 18.1D

) (

Sale, 1992

). As the stimulus increases, the larger α
1
 motor neurons that innervate the fast oxidative glycolytic (FOG) muscle fibers are activated, followed by the recruitment of fast glycolytic (FG) fibers as the stimulus increases. For example, the speed continuum of walk, jog, and run involves a continuum of SO, FOG, and FG muscle fiber recruitment. Once the neural stimulation ends, deactivation proceeds in reverse sequence. The larger, faster fibers (FG, then FOG) are inactivated first; finally, the slower, smaller fibers are deactivated until only muscle tonus remains.



Mechanical Factors Influencing Muscle Contractions


Several mechanical factors influence the force produced during muscle contractions. This section discusses four mechanical factors: length-tension-angle relationships, force-velocity relationships, the elasticity-force relationship, and cross-sectional area/architectural design. Force production in a muscle fiber is discussed first, followed by the more complex situation in whole muscles.


LENGTH-TENSION-ANGLE RELATIONSHIPS Within a muscle fiber, the amount of tension that can be exerted is related to the initial length of the sarcomeres. As shown in Figure 18.2A
, this relationship forms an inverted
 U (Edman, 1992
). The amount of tension produced is directly related to the degree of overlap of the thick and thin filaments. In elongated fibers, there is little overlap of the actin and myosin filaments, making it hard for cross-bridges to form. In shortened fibers, where the thick and thin filaments already overlap almost completely, there is little room for further shortening. Thus, less force is produced in both the elongated and shortened positions. In contrast, the maximum number of cross-bridges coincides with the highest force production, which occurs at approximately 100–120% of the resting sarcomere length (Edman, 1992
).









FIGURE 18.2

 Length-Tension Relationship in Muscle.
 
 A.
 Length-tension relationship in skeletal muscle fibers. B.
 Example of a strength curve illustrating the length-tension relationship in whole muscle. Source: Edman (1992). Copyright 1992 by International Olympic Committee. Reprinted by permission.





In whole muscle, this length-tension relationship also holds, but its expression is complicated by many factors. These factors include the cross-sectional area of the muscle, the arrangement of the sarcomere in relation to the line of pull, the level of neural muscle activation, the degree of fatigue, the involvement of the elastic components of muscle, and the biomechanical aspects of how a muscle exerts force at a joint. The biomechanical aspects are most notable, as described below.




When whole-muscle tension (measured as muscle force or torque) is plotted against the joint angle at which it occurs, strength curves are generated (

Figure 18.2B

). Imagine the muscle action involved in performing a bicep curl. As the barbell is lifted through the joint’s range of motion, different amounts of force are generated to compensate for biomechanical differences related to joint angle. Of course, the force produced depends on the length of the sarcomere, but force production is also greatly influenced by biomechanical aspects of the joint.
 
Figure 18.2B

 shows the strength curve for this bicep curl (elbow flexion) example. The joint angle is plotted along the horizontal axis, and the force of the contracting muscle is plotted along the vertical axis. In this graph, the action of raising the barbell proceeds from right to left because the joint angle is greatest in the lowered position (~170 degrees) and smallest with the barbell in the raised position (~30 degrees). In this example, peak force occurs at approximately 100–120 degrees.




As indicated in
 
Figure 18.3

, strength curves occur in three forms: ascending, descending, or ascending and descending. An
 ascending strength curve
 is characterized by an increase in torque as the joint angle increases. A
 descending strength curve
 is characterized by a decrease in torque as the joint angle increases. In an
 ascending and descending strength curve
, the force initially increases and then decreases as a function of joint angle.










FIGURE 18.3
 Classification of Strength Curves.
 
 A.
 Ascending. B.
 Descending. C.
 Ascending and descending. Source: Kulig et al. (1984). Reprinted by permission of Williams & Wilkins.






Figure 18.4A

 presents a generalized strength curve for knee flexion. Most studies describe this as an ascending curve, although some findings disagree (

Kulig et al., 1984

). As shown in the figure, when the joint angle is greatest, the greatest force is exerted. This point also corresponds to the point at which the muscles of the hamstrings are longest.










FIGURE 18.4
 Strength Curves.
 
 A.
 Knee flexion. B.
 Hip abduction. C.
 Elbow flexion. D.
 Knee extension. Source: Kulig et al. (1984). Reprinted by permission of Williams & Wilkins.






Figure 18.4B

 presents a generalized strength curve for hip abduction (

Kulig et al., 1984

). This curve is generally described as descending. In this case, larger joint angles correspond to lower forces. In this example, the tensor fasciae latae (the muscle responsible for hip abduction) is longest at the lowest joint angle.




Both of these situations—

Figure 18.4A

 and
 
B

—are in reality consistent: The longer the muscle length, the greater the force exerted. However, remember that it is not just, or even primarily, the length of the muscle itself that causes this variation.




There is general agreement that both elbow flexion (

Figure 18.4C

) and knee extension (

Figure 18.4D

) exhibit ascending and descending strength curves (

Kulig et al., 1984

). The strongest angles for elbow flexion seem to be between 90 degrees and 130 degrees; for knee extension, the strongest angles are between 100 degrees and 130 degrees. As with the other configurations, the joint angle that coincides with the greatest force production is partially, but not entirely, a result of the muscle length and degree of overlap of the thick and thin filaments.




Although there are some differences, the strength curves are similar for males and females, and the young and the old. Injuries typically result in low strength curve values; thus, preinjury strength curves or strength curves from a comparable healthy individual are sometimes used as goals in rehabilitation. Standard norms for strength curves are not generally available.




Knowledge of strength curves has another practical application. When lifting an external load—for example, a barbell through the range of elbow flexion (bicep curl exercise)—the individual is limited by the weight that can be handled at the weakest point. The stronger angles are not overloaded as much as the weaker angles, and the muscle is taxed maximally only at its “sticking point.”




Finally, strength curves have been used to design strength training equipment—specifically, variable-resistance

 equipment (

Kulig et al., 1984

). Nautilus developed the variable-radius cam to mimic the strength curve of selected single-joint exercises. The aim is to compensate for changes in mechanical leverage throughout the range of motion of a joint, thereby matching the load to the strength curve so that the muscles are taxed maximally at all angles, not just at the sticking point. Although this reasoning seems logical, training studies have not demonstrated that greater benefits are derived from variable-resistance training programs than from traditional free weight programs. On the contrary, it appears that training programs that employ free weights produce superior strength gains (

Stone et al., 2000

).



FORCE-VELOCITY AND POWER-VELOCITY RELATIONSHIPS The second major mechanical factor that influences the expression of muscle force or torque is the velocity at which the shortening occurs.



The relationship between force and velocity is similar for a single muscle fiber (

Figure 18.5A

) and an intact whole muscle (

Figure 18.5B

). The single muscle fiber does not exhibit the smooth hyperbolic curve of an intact muscle, but both show the basic relationship: The shortening velocity of a muscle increases as the force developed by the muscle decreases, which means that a muscle can shorten fastest when the load is the lightest. Maximal velocity occurs in an unloaded (zero force) situation, and a maximal load results in no movement (zero velocity). Between these two extremes, the velocity gradually decreases in a curvilinear fashion as the load increases. To apply this information, think about swinging a baseball bat. As the weight of the bat increases, the speed with which it can be swung decreases.










FIGURE 18.5
 Force-Velocity Curves.
 
 A.
 In a single muscle fiber. B.
 In a whole muscle. Source: From Edman (1992). Copyright 1992 by International Olympic Committee. Reprinted by permission.





If the external force overcomes the ability of the muscle to resist it, the muscle lengthens (eccentric contraction) but only after producing additional tension (

Stauber, 1989

). The eccentric contraction is seen in
 
Figure 18.5A

 where the force curve dips below the horizontal axis. Notice that the force produced continues to increase during this eccentric phase. This result is consistent with earlier statements made about eccentric dynamic contractions.




It is interesting to note that on the cellular level, the maximal velocity of shortening varies among individual muscle fibers, but within the same fibers, maximal velocity of shortening is constant regardless of the sarcomere length (

Figure 18.6

) (

Edman, 1992

).










FIGURE 18.6
 Velocity-Length Curves.
 Source: Reprinted from Edman (1992), with permission.





Compare
 
Figure 18.6

 with
 
Figure 18.2

 (the length-tension curve). This comparison shows that the length of the sarcomere influences force production but does not affect the velocity of force production. The maximum velocity of shortening does not depend on the number of cross-bridges between the thick and thin filaments but on the maximal cycling rate of the cross-bridges (

Edman, 1992

).





Figure 18.7

 shows the relationship between power and velocity in whole muscles. These data were derived from a study of two different groups of subjects: one with more than 50% FT muscle fibers (average = 58.5%) and the other with less than 50% FT fibers (average = 38.3%) (

Coyle et al., 1976

). Several conclusions can be drawn from this graph.










FIGURE 18.7
 Influence of Fiber Type on Velocity-Power Relationship.
 Source: Coyle et al. (1976).





1.
 Power is positively related to velocity.




2.
 The shape of the relationship is curvilinear. Consider what this power-velocity relationship would mean if a heavier (rather than lighter) bat can be swung quickly enough to contact a fast pitch.




3.
 The graph in
 
Figure 18.7

 shows that the power that can be generated at any given velocity varies with the predominant fiber type. At any given velocity,

 the resulting power is higher in individuals with more than 50% FT fibers than in individuals with less than 50% FT fibers. Thus, individuals with high percentages of FT fibers would seem to be genetically predisposed, given sufficient training and practice, to be more successful in power events such as sprinting, power lifting, and jumping and in field events such as shot, javelin, and discus.




4.
 The power curve of the predominantly ST fiber individuals (those with <50% FT) not only levels off but also makes a downturn at the higher velocities. Although such a downturn is not evident at the tested speeds for the FT group, it is likely that there is a fiber-type–specific optimal speed of movement for the generation of power.



ELASTICITY-FORCE RELATIONSHIP Elasticity is the third mechanical factor involved in the force development capabilities of muscles. Both the muscle fibers and their tendinous attachments contain elastic components. When a muscle fiber is stretched and then contracted, the resultant contraction is stronger than it would have been without prestretching. In the intact human, the relationship between prestretch and force of contraction is expressed as a stretch-shortening cycle (SSC), where the preactivated muscle is first stretched (eccentric action) and then followed by the shortening (concentric) action (Komi, 1992
; Nicol et al., 2006
). Stretch-shortening cycles do not occur in all human movements, however. They are most evident in activities such as running, jumping, and (to a lesser extent) bicycling. Figure 18.8
 shows that the calf muscles and Achilles tendon are stretched while contracting eccentrically as a runner’s foot impacts the ground (Komi, 1992
). The push-off, or concentric-shortening phase, is aided by the release of the potential energy stored during the stretch phase. To feel the impact of the SSC, stand up and see how high you can jump with a little flexion as possible and then with moderate flexion at your hip, knee, and ankle joints. Finally, try a rebound jump from a small stool. This latter task is an example of a plyometric exercise
. A plyometric exercise is one in which a concentric contraction is immediately preceded by an eccentric contraction (such as the eccentric contraction upon landing and absorbing the force from jumping off a stool before the concentric contraction of jumping up). Plyometrics will be discussed more thoroughly in the section on flexibility in Chapter 20
, because more than just elasticity is involved in the physiological basis for their execution. As a result of additional power generation with increasing stretch-proceeding contraction, you should be able to jump successively higher in the three examples.









FIGURE 18.8
 Stretch-Shortening Cycle.
 Source: Komi (1984). Reprinted by permission of Williams & Wilkins.





The stretch-shortening cycle not only leads to more powerful muscle contractions but also affects mechanical efficiency. Efficiency is discussed at length in
 
Chapter 4

. The point here is that more work can be done with less energy expenditure following a prestretch.



CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA/ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN The maximal force that can be developed
 within a muscle fiber is related to its cross-sectional area. The force that can be developed by a whole muscle is also related to its cross-sectional area. However, this relationship is not as strong as the one within a single muscle fiber, largely owing to different arrangements of the muscle fibers within a muscle. Muscles that are designed for a high force generation (pennate, bipennate, and multipennate muscles) are arranged anatomically to maximize their cross-sectional area. Muscles designed for high-velocity shortening have parallel fibers and are arranged in a fusiform manner (Goldspink, 1992
).




Muscular Fatigue and Soreness




Despite all the benefits and enjoyment of exercise, unaccustomed muscular activity can also lead to some unpleasant outcomes. The following section discusses two such consequences: muscular fatigue and muscular soreness.


Muscular Fatigue


Anyone who has participated in vigorous activity is familiar with muscular fatigue. Although fatigue is a familiar experience, pinpointing a definition of fatigue has been difficult. The research literature contains multiple definitions including a motor deficit, a gradual decrease in the force capacity of a muscle or the endpoint of a sustained activity. Such a broad usage of the term fatigue has made it more difficult to understand the physiological mechanisms responsible for the phenomenon (Enoka and Duchateau, 2008
). The National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) defines fatigue as “a condition in which there is a loss in the capacity for developing force and/or velocity of a muscle, resulting from muscle activity under load which is reversible by rest” (NHLBI, 1990
). This means that fatigue results in a transient loss in the ability of the muscle to develop force and or velocity, often leading to a cessation of muscular work or an inability to maintain a given intensity of work. The muscle is not damaged, and restoration and recovery are possible (Fitts, 2008
). Fatigue is most often quantified as the magnitude of fall of force or power in response to a specific protocol designed to induce fatigue or as the duration of a contraction or exercise that can be maintained at a specified level (Kent-Braun et al., 2012
).



But what causes muscle fatigue? Muscle fatigue is a complex and still controversial phenomenon that appears to include failure at one or more of the sites along the chain of events that leads to muscular contraction. Fatigue can be caused by many different mechanisms, and the cause of fatigue is often specific to the task being performed (

Enoka and Duchateau, 2008

). As diagrammed in
 
Figure 18.9

, fatigue can be classified as central or peripheral based on the site of fatigue. Central sites refer to the nervous system (brain and spinal cord), whereas peripheral sites include specific sites in the skeletal muscle.
 
Table 18.2

 lists the possible sites of fatigue and summarizes the proposed mechanisms for the muscle fatigue at each site. In reality, fatigue is a complex phenomenon that likely results from an interaction of these mechanisms at one or more sites. Fatigue depends on the type of exercise performed, the fiber type of the muscle involved, and the exerciser’s fitness and nutritional status.










FIGURE 18.9
 Possible Sites of Muscle Fatigue.





TABLE 18.2
 Site of Muscle Fatigue and Proposed Mechanism







Central fatigue
 may be related to neurons in the brain or spinal cord, inhibitory input from muscle afferents innervating neurons in the brain, or alterations in motor neurons. Central fatigue may also be influenced by psychological factors and motivation involving how much effort the individual makes, particularly when continuing the activity causes pain.



Peripheral fatigue
 refers to fatigue at a site beyond the central nervous system (CNS), anywhere from the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) to the skeletal muscle. Peripheral fatigue can occur at several specific sites: the neuromuscular junction, the sarcolemma-T tubules-sarcoplasmic reticulum system, and the myofilaments. Failure of neuromuscular transmission is a possible cause of fatigue. This failure could include depletion of the neurotransmitter and/or problems with the binding of the neurotransmitter to the receptors on the motor end plate. Fatigue could also result from a failure of the electrical excitation along the sarcolemma and T tubules and an inability of the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) to release sufficient calcium. Likewise, fatigue could result from any alteration in the ability of calcium to bind to troponin and thereby remove tropomyosin from its blocking position on actin. Fatigue might also result from biochemical and metabolic changes within the contractile elements (myofilaments of the muscle cell).




Notice in
 
Figure 18.9

 that fatigue can also be categorized in relation to electrophysiological or contractile biochemical considerations. Electrophysiological considerations involve steps within the central nervous system, the peripheral nervous system, or the muscle fiber leading up to the binding of the actin and myosin filaments (A.*M).

 These include the initial neural impulse from the motor cortex, transmission of the impulse across the synapse, propagation of the neural impulse along the motor neuron, transmission of the impulse across the neuromuscular junction, and subsequent spread of an action potential along the sarcolemma and into the T tubules. Contractile considerations involve the ability of actin and myosin to continue their cross-bridge attachment-detachment cycles, thus producing force. The reduced peak force with fatigue can be explained by both a decline in the force per cross-bridge and the number of cross-bridges that are formed (

Fitts, 2008

;
 
Nocella et al., 2011

).




Two primary hypotheses attempt to explain the causes of fatigue within the contractile elements of the muscle: the depletion (or exhaustion) hypothesis and the accumulation hypothesis (

MacLaren et al., 1989

). The depletion hypothesis suggests that fatigue results from decrease in certain metabolites, specifically, ATP, phosphocreatine (PC), and glycogen. Thus, the muscle fibers are no longer able to produce force. The accumulation hypothesis suggests that fatigue is caused by the accumulation of certain metabolites that are known to impair force generation within muscles, specifically, lactate, hydrogen ions, ammonia, and phosphate.







FOCUS ON APPLICATION






The Effects of Caffeine on Exercise and Sports Performance






Caffeine has been used for many centuries and is well known for increasing wakefulness. Caffeine is also used as an ergogenic aid to enhance sport performance. Caffeine is readily absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract and appears in the blood stream 15–45 minutes after ingestion, with peak blood concentrations occurring approximately 1 hour after ingestion. The effectiveness of caffeine as an ergogenic aid varies with the type of activity performed.







Caffeine has a well-documented beneficial effect on endurance performance. It is acknowledged that caffeine’s effect on endurance exercise is multifactorial, and there is evidence that caffeine has an effect on both the central nervous system and the excitation contraction coupling of skeletal muscle (

Tarnopolsky, 2008

). Caffeine also stimulates the delivery to and utilization of free fatty acids by the working muscles, thereby sparing glycogen. Improvements in sustained endurance events are apparent after low-to-moderate doses of caffeine (3–6 mg·kg
−1
 BW).








More recently, the impact caffeine has on short-term, high-intensity performance, such as sprinting, team sports, and resistance training, has been studied with varying results. The discrepancies in published studies may be due to differences in testing protocols, the caffeine dose, training status, and habitual caffeine use. Astorino and Roberson reviewed the impact of acute caffeine use on short-term, high-intensity exercise and found that a majority of the studies reported an increase in performance for team sport exercise and power-related sports. However, the results were more pronounced in elite athletes who did not regularly use caffeine. Similarly, the benefit of caffeine ingestion was noted in the studies that employed resistance training. A study conducted by
 
Beck et al. (2006)

 tested 37 resistance trained men (mean age 21 years) on the Wingate Anaerobic Test, a one-repetition max test, and a muscle endurance test after ingesting 2.5 mg·kg
−1
 BW of caffeine or placebo. There was a 2.1% increase in the one-repetition max test for the caffeine group, while there was no change for the placebo group. There were no changes in the Wingate Anaerobic Test or the muscle endurance test for either group. In general, research suggests that moderate caffeine ingestion (4–6 mg·kg
−1
 BW) is advantageous for short-term, high-intensity performance in trained athletes.








While research indicates a benefit of acute caffeine ingestion for various types of activity, the exact mechanism of action remains unknown. As with other ergogenic aids, it should be noted that it is rare that a single mechanism fully explains physiological effects of a supplement (

Goldstein et al., 2010

). It has been proposed that caffeine exerts its beneficial effects on sports performance through several potential mechanisms. Possible mechanisms include stimulation of the central nervous system and alteration of substrate utilization, β-endorphin release, and neuromuscular function.
 
Astorino and Roberson (2010)

 have proposed a model to explain the impact caffeine has on the central nervous system and skeletal muscles to improve short-term, high-intensity performance. This model, presented in the accompanying figure, reinforces the fact that there are multiple ways that caffeine may affect both the central nervous system and the muscular system to improve performance and prevent fatigue. The model also notes areas where research evidence is more robust.








Given that caffeine supplementation can significantly enhance athletic performance, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) has mandated an upper limit on caffeine (12 μg·mL
−1
 in the urine). Caffeine ingestion of 9–13 mg·kg
−1
 BW (6–8 cups of brewed coffee) approximately 1 hour before testing would correspond to maximal urinary concentrations. The National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) has set a value of greater than 15 μg·mL
−1
 as illegal.








The International Society of Sports Nutrition (ISSN) has concluded that caffeine has an ergogenic affect that is specific to the condition of the athlete and the type of exercise being performed (

Goldstein et al., 2010

). Based on the available scientific literature, they have drawn the following conclusions:






1.
 Caffeine should be ingested 60 minutes prior to the onset of activity to ensure optimal absorption.




2.
 Caffeine should be ingested in low-to-moderate doses (~3–6 mg·kg
−1
 BW). There is no further benefit when consumed in higher amounts (≥9 mg·kg
−1
 BW).




3.
 Caffeine has been shown to be an effective ergogenic aid in maximal endurance and time trial events.




4.
 Caffeine has been shown to be an effective ergogenic aid in prolonged, high-intensity team sports, such as soccer, rowing, or field hockey.




5.
 Research is inconsistent regarding the effectiveness of caffeine as an ergogenic aid in strength and power performance. These inconsistencies may be due to differences in training protocols, fitness of the participants, or caffeine dosage. More research is still needed in this area.




6.
 Limited research has shown a positive benefit of caffeine on strength/power of trained women and a moderate increase in performance for the recreationally trained women.




7.
 Caffeine is more effective when consumed in a capsule/tablet form as compared to drinking coffee.










Sources:
 
Astorino and Roberson (2010)

;
 
Beck et al. (2006)

;
 
Ganio et al. (2009)

;
 
Goldstein et al. (2010)

;
 
Tarnopolsky (2008)

.








Current research suggests that the primary site of fatigue, in the absence of disease, is within the contractile machinery of the muscle itself (

Kent-Braun et al., 2012

). The factors that contribute to fatigue are complex and interrelated and depend on the muscle fibers involved and the type of activity being performed. The depletion of PC leads to fatigue in FG fibers that rely on this substrate to regenerate ATP for explosive-type events. The depletion of glycogen leads to fatigue in SO fibers that rely on this substrate to produce ATP aerobically during prolonged activity. The accumulation of lactate and the H
+
 associated with lactic acid may lead to fatigue by interfering with the contractile process in several places, decreasing the amount of calcium released, interfering with calcium-troponin binding, disrupting the Na
+
-K
+
 pump, inhibiting anaerobic glycolysis (by inhibiting the rate-limiting enzyme PFK), or interfering with cross-bridging. The detrimental effects of H
+
 accumulation appear most evident in FOG fibers that produce large amounts of lactic acid. But the role lactic acid plays in muscular fatigue is far from clear. Several recent studies suggest that lactate and acidosis during exercise are beneficial; acidosis may cause greater release of oxygen from hemoglobin for working muscle (Bohr effect) and enhance blood flow, while lactate released from working muscle may be taken up and utilized by other cells as a metabolic fuel (see
 
Chapter 3

). While the controversy about the role or roles of lactate remain to be resolved, what is certain is that lactate/H
+
 may contribute to fatigue but is not the sole cause of muscular fatigue (

Bangsbo et al., 2006

;
 
Cairns, 2006

;
 
Grassi et al., 2015

;
 
Lamb et al., 2006

).




Because many types of activity involve more than one fiber type and different recruitment patterns, several of the mechanisms described in this section may be involved in muscle fatigue for any given activity (

Conley, 2000

;
 
Fitts, 2012

)

.



Type of Activity and Muscle Fatigue


Fatigue results from different mechanisms in different types of activity. Furthermore, the fiber type involved in a given activity greatly influences the most probable mechanism of fatigue for that activity. Table 18.3
 summarizes the most probable causes of fatigue for different types of activity. Note that any given activity may have several possible causes and that the proposed mechanisms often interact. Investigation in this area is ongoing.



TABLE 18.3
 Most Probable Causes of Muscle Fatigue






Long-Term, Moderate to Heavy, Submaximal Aerobic Exercise


Steady-state activities that are performed at moderate workloads rely almost exclusively on SO fibers to produce ATP. As a result, lactic acid levels do not increase substantially during these activities. The most probable cause of fatigue during steady-state activities is the depletion of glycogen stores, resulting in peripheral fatigue (Hargreaves, 2015
; Hawley and Leckey, 2015
). During prolonged activities performed at an intensity high enough to recruit FOG fibers, a significant amount of lactic acid is formed. In this case, the high levels of H+
 likely contribute to fatigue (Conley, 2000
).



Central fatigue is also thought to play a significant role in fatigue during prolonged activities. The “central fatigue” hypothesis suggests that an alteration in brain neurotransmitters (specifically the ratio of serotonin to dopamine) is associated with reduced motor unit recruitment and feelings of tiredness and lethargy during prolonged activity (

Meeusen et al., 2006

;
 
Newsholme et al., 1987

).

 Central fatigue may be especially important in prolonged activities in warm environments (

Nybo and Nielsen, 2001

).



Incremental Aerobic Exercise to Maximum


Incremental aerobic exercise to maximum involves recruiting all muscle fiber types in the order of SO, FOG, and FG corresponding to the increasing intensity of effort. All of the mechanisms described above likely play a role in fatigue during this type of exercise. Furthermore, the cardiovascular system may be unable to provide blood supply to the working muscle adequate to support aerobic energy production (Conley, 2000
).


Static Exercise


When a person maintains a static contraction at a given intensity (expressed as a percentage of maximal voluntary contraction, %MVC), force decreases over time because of fatigue. Figure 18.10
 depicts the force a muscle can produce statically as a function of time. This figure suggests that if the individual sustains a static contraction (in this case, a handgrip exercise) at less than 20% MVC, the load can be maintained indefinitely. However, as the %MVC increases, the time that the contraction can be maintained decreases rapidly. A force equal to 50% MVC can be maintained only for approximately 1 minute in a handgrip exercise. The precise shape of the fatigue curve varies among muscle groups, reflecting differences in fiber-type distribution and architectural design.









FIGURE 18.10
 Hypothetical Fatigue Curve for Handgrip. 






Fatigue likely results from several factors: depletion of PC in FG fibers (if the intensity of effort is great enough to recruit them), the accumulation of H
+
, and inhibition of the CNS by afferent fibers that are sensitive to the buildup of H
+
 and other metabolites (

Conley, 2000

).



Dynamic Resistance Exercise


Dynamic resistance exercises that involve very few repetitions employ FG fibers. Fatigue is therefore likely due to a depletion of PC. In resistance exercise involving a high number of repetitions or a high total volume of work, fatigue is more likely caused by an accumulation of H+
 (and perhaps Pi
 and ADP) acting at the cross-bridges to reduce force, velocity, and power (Conley, 2000
).


Very Short-Term, High-Intensity Anaerobic Exercise


When an individual performs a high-intensity exercise, the amount of force that can be developed decreases rapidly due to fatigue. Figure 18.11
 depicts the change in force production on a Wingate Anaerobic Test (described fully in Chapter 3
). During this test, the participant pedaled as hard as possible for 30 seconds. Despite continued maximal effort, the force that could be developed decreased dramatically over this period.









FIGURE 18.11
 Force Decrement During Short-Term, High-Intensity Exercise (30 Seconds. WAT). 






Very short-term, high-intensity anaerobic activities rely largely on FT fibers to produce ATP. Explosive power events rely more heavily on FG, whereas activities that continue 1–3 minutes rely more heavily on FOG fibers. During explosive-type activities involving a predominance of FG fibers, fatigue most likely results from the depletion of PC stores and the subsequent inability to regenerate ATP. During anaerobic activities that rely on anaerobic metabolism and use FOG fibers, the primary factor limiting performance appears to be the accumulation of H
+
 associated with increased lactic acid. The accumulation of H
+
 interferes with the contractile process (see explanation above) and inhibits the production of ATP by anaerobic glycolysis (

Conley, 2000

). A recent study has shown that ingestion of sodium bicarbonate improves high-intensity intermittent exercise performance in trained young men (

Krustrup et al., 2015

). Because sodium bicarbonate increases the buffering capacity in the blood, this evidence supports that importance of increased [H
+
] (decreased pH) in fatigue during high-intensity intermittent exercise. However, other lines of research suggest that inorganic phosphate, produced because of the hydrolysis of phosphocreatine (PC), is a major cause of muscle fatigue (

Westerblad et al., 2002

).






FOCUS ON RESEARCH:
 Clinically Relevant





Effect of Glucose Supplementation on Fatigue






Glucose is an important substrate during muscular work, and decreased levels of blood glucose during prolonged activity have been linked to fatigue. Ingestion of carbohydrates during prolonged exercise may improve performance, whereas an insufficient supply of glucose may lead to hypoglycemia and fatigue. Fatigue is known to involve both central and peripheral factors. This study investigated the effects of glucose supplementation during 3 hours of cycling and subsequent force production during a 2-minute sustained maximal static contraction of the knee extensors. During the trial, subjects cycled at 60% of their 

. In the glucose trial, they ingested a 6% glucose drink, and in the placebo trial, they ingested an equal volume of a noncaloric placebo drink. A total of 200 g of carbohydrate was ingested in the glucose trial, and a total of 3.3 L of fluid was ingested in both trials.







During the maximal knee extension task, subjects were instructed to attempt to maintain maximal contraction throughout the 2-minute period. An electrical stimulation was superimposed every 30 seconds to assess the subjects’ ability to voluntarily produce activation of the motor neurons.








This study demonstrated that prolonged exercise was associated with decreased blood glucose levels and elevated RPE and that glucose supplementation was able to maintain blood glucose and lessen perceived exertion during the exercise bout. As expected, maximal force generation decreased during the 2 minutes of sustained maximal voluntary contraction in all conditions (baseline, after glucose ingestion, and after a placebo trial). At the onset of the maximal contraction, force was similar in the glucose and placebo trials. However, in the last minute of sustained contraction, the glucose ingestion trial subjects maintained a higher percentage of maximal voluntary force than did the placebo subjects. Furthermore, the glucose subjects achieved a higher voluntary activation percentage at 60, 90, and 120 seconds of contraction.








This study found that the development of hypoglycemia during prolonged exercise is associated with impaired neuromuscular performance, and the lower force generated during a subsequent sustained maximal contraction seems to be related to “central fatigue.” This suggests that hypoglycemia impairs the ability to maintain high neural drive to the muscles. The observed “central fatigue” seems to be alleviated by carbohydrate supplementation.










Source:
 Nybo, L.: CNS fatigue and prolonged exercise: Effect of glucose supplementation. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise.
 35(4):589–594 (2003)
.




Muscle Soreness


Muscle soreness is a familiar consequence of overexertion. The two generally recognized types of muscle soreness are immediate and delayed onset. Immediate-onset soreness
 is characterized by pain during and immediately after exercise, which may persist for several hours. This type of soreness is thought to be caused by stimulation of the pain receptors by metabolic by-products of cellular respiration, especially the H+
 associated with increased lactic acid levels. It is generally relieved by discontinuing exercise or subsides shortly thereafter.



Delayed-onset muscle soreness (DOMS)
 is characterized by muscle tenderness, pain on palpitation, and mechanical stiffness that appears approximately 8 hours

 after exercise, increases and peaks over the next 24–48 hours, and usually subsides within 96 hours (

Byrne et al., 2004

). Delayed-onset muscle soreness is generally considered an adult phenomenon. Children experience less muscle damage from excessive exercise than do adults and may recover more quickly (

Rowland, 2005

). The age in adolescence when this changes has not been determined.






Delayed-Onset Muscle Soreness (DOMS)
 is a condition characterized by muscle tenderness, pain on palpitation, and mechanical stiffness that appears approximately 8 hours after exercise, increases and peaks over the next 24–48 hours, and usually subsides within 96 hours.





DOMS is of concern to exercise professionals because it affects athletic performance and exercise participation. Despite its importance and considerable research attention, the precise causative factors and cellular mechanisms of DOMS remain elusive. However, there is widespread agreement that muscle damage and inflammation play important roles in DOMS. Eccentric muscle action has been documented as the principle factor responsible for muscle damage (

Byrne et al., 2004

).



Etiology and Mechanisms


The model most likely to explain DOMS combines at least three theories: the mechanical trauma, muscle damage, and inflammation theories. The sequence of events in this integrated model is still hypothetical but is backed by considerable research (Armstrong, 1984
; Byrne et al., 2004
; Cheung et al., 2003
; Smith, 1991
):



1.
 Unaccustomed high-force activity, particularly during eccentric muscle contraction, causes disruption of structural proteins in muscle fibers, especially along the Z lines of the sarcomeres. At the same time, damage occurs to the connective tissue at the muscle-tendon junction.




2.
 Damage to the sarcolemma of the cell leads to an accumulation of calcium, which in turn inhibits ATP production and causes a disruption in calcium homeostasis. (Remember that ATP is needed to return calcium to its storage locations.) High calcium concentrations lead to further degradation of the Z discs, troponin, and tropomyosin and ultimately tissue necrosis (death).




3.
 Structural damage initiates inflammation and activation of the immune system. Fluid moves into the muscle and causes swelling (edema).




4.
 The accumulation of by-products and debris from the cellular deaths and the immune system response in addition to increased pressure from the edema ultimately stimulate pain nerve endings, resulting in the sensations associated with DOMS.





Figure 18.12

 summarizes the integrated model of DOMS. The sequence of events whereby muscle trauma leads to inflammation and activation of the immune system is described fully in
 
Chapter 22

. In fact, the cytokine hypothesis of overtraining proposes that muscle damage, inflammation, and the immune response are central to explaining the symptoms of overtraining (

Smith, 2000

). In addition to the well-established theories that contribute to the integrated model of DOMS, researchers have also provided evidence that oxidative stress (

Ascensão et al., 2008

), the release of bradykinin (

Murase et al., 2010

), and restricted blood flow (

Umbel et al., 2009

) may play a role in DOMS.










FIGURE 18.12
 An Integrated Model to Explain Delayed-Onset Muscle Soreness (DOMS).
 This integrated model of DOMS recognizes that mechanical trauma leads to muscle damage, resulting in an inflammatory response that causes swelling and pain.





One of the popular misconceptions about DOMS is that it is caused by the accumulation of lactic acid. Although this theory was originally proposed by researchers (

Asmussen, 1956

;
 
Edington and Edgerton, 1976

), it remains popular only with the lay public. Considerable research evidence now argues against this theory, including the fact that individuals with McArdle’s syndrome, who do not produce lactic acid, also suffer from DOMS. Additional evidence against lactic acid as the cause of

 muscle soreness is that the type of activity that produces the greatest degree of soreness, eccentric contractions, produces lower lactic acid levels than concentric contractions of the same power output (

Armstrong et al., 1983

;
 
Bonde-Petersen et al., 1972

;
 
Davies and Barnes, 1972

). Perhaps the most compelling evidence is that lactic acid has a half-life of 15–25 minutes and is fully cleared from muscle within an hour (see
 
Chapter 3

). Since lactic acid is not present at elevated levels 24–48 hours later, it cannot cause soreness then.



Effect on Muscle Function


While the sensation of soreness (DOMS) is important, many athletes are equally concerned with the functional impairments related to muscle damage. Exercise-induced muscle damage, especially with eccentric exercise, has a detrimental effect on muscle function. Muscle damage reduces strength, power, and performance. Unusual patterns of muscle recruitment during any given movement may include alteration in temporal sequencing of muscles. Altered joint mechanics and reduced joint range of motion have also been reported. These impairments are immediate but may persist for a prolonged period even though the athlete or exerciser may perceive no change. Reduced strength and power may lead to an individual working at a higher intensity than normal. Altered coordination or segment motion as well as reduced force output may lead to compensatory recruitment of muscles unused to such work. An inaccurate perception of impairment may lead to a premature return to high-intensity exercise (Cheung et al., 2003
).



Evidence suggests that the time course of functional impairment is not the same as the time course of the sensation of DOMS (

Byrne et al., 2004

). The severity of muscle function impairment and time course of recovery greatly depend on the muscle group studied and the exercise protocol. An eccentric exercise protocol resulted in a 57% loss in strength immediately after exercise with strength measures remaining 33% below baseline after 5.5 days of recovery (

Sayers and Clarkson, 2001

). Performing the eccentric phase of a barbell squat exercise resulted in a 30–40% reduction in knee extensor strength immediately after exercise, which recovered to 95% of baseline strength by day 7 of recovery (

Byrne and Eston, 2002

). Marathon running has been shown to result in a 30% reduction in ankle extensor strength, which recovered fully 2 days after the race (

Avela et al., 1999

). A soccer match has also resulted in evidence of muscle damage and impaired function (

Ascensão et al., 2008

). Importantly, the time course of recovery varies substantially among individuals.




An athlete, coach, or clinician must be sensitive to individual differences when planning workouts after a stressful bout of exercise, particularly when it includes a large eccentric component, because recovery varies considerably. DOMS may otherwise lead to more substantial injury.



Treatment for Relief and Prevention


Several different treatment strategies have been researched to prevent DOMS or decrease the severity of the symptoms and restore function to the affected muscles as quickly as possible. Anti-inflammatory drug use has been suggested to prevent or treat muscle soreness, since inflammation is clearly part of the DOMS cycle. Although nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) (such as aspirin, naproxen, and ibuprofen) do help relieve DOMS symptoms, their effect on muscle damage is less clear because muscle damage generates a local proinflammatory response, but the systemic response is tightly regulated by anti-inflammatory mediators (Peake et al., 2005
). Current evidence suggests that NSAIDS may be beneficial for short-term recovery from muscle damage and soreness in healthy individuals (Cheung et al., 2003
; Lanier, 2003). Research has also found that branched-chain amino acid supplementation administered before heavy resistance exercise can lessen the functional impairment associated with DOMS (Shimomura et al., 2010
).



Acute exercise also diminishes DOMS (

Armstrong et al., 1983

). Indeed, exercise is the most effective technique for decreasing the pain of DOMS. Unfortunately, this analgesic effect ends quickly when the activity is stopped. Compression of the sore area may be of some value. Two recent meta-analyses with an overlap of only one research study have both shown that the wearing of compression garments during recovery from exercise (but not necessarily during exercise) is beneficial for reducing the severity of DOMS. The effects of compression garments during recovery probably results from an improvement in venous return and waste clearance from blood (

Beliard et al., 2015

;
 
Hill et al., 2014

). Massage has shown varying results that warrant further research. Research is needed to determine whether manual manipulation of injured tissue enhances healing or delays it. Static stretching is thought to initiate the inverse myotatic reflex (by stimulation of the Golgi tendon organs, GTO), which results in relaxation of the stretched muscle (

DeVries and Housh, 1994

). (Reflexes are discussed in detail in
 
Chapter 20

.) Although some research (

DeVries and Housh, 1994

) has demonstrated a reduced soreness resulting from stretching, other research has not (

McGlynn et al., 1979

). Icing, ultrasound, and electrical current modalities have not been shown to consistently eliminate DOMS symptoms (

Cheung et al., 2003

) although there is evidence that cold water immersion or contrast water therapy may be of benefit (

Vaile et al., 2008

). There is no apparent relationship between ratings of muscle soreness and protein ingestion whether consumed prior to, during, or after an acute bout of endurance or resistance exercise. However, reduced muscle soreness does appear to be a benefit when supplemental protein is consumed after daily training sessions (

Pasiakos et al., 2014

).Complete the Check Your Comprehension 1—Case Study 1 to apply your knowledge of muscle soreness.








CHECK YOUR COMPREHENSION 1
 CASE STUDY 1






Claire and Louise are relatively active middle-aged women who were doing a 1.6-mile hike (3.2-mile round trip) that they had done several times. After a little friendly banter about their fitness levels, the women decided to see how fast they could get up and then back down the mountain. They made it up the mountain trail in record time by running whenever it was safe to do so. They had some water at the top and then descended as quickly as possible, running most of the way. They were more tired than usual that evening but generally felt very good. However, the next afternoon, they both noticed that they were very sore. By the evening of the next day, and all during the following day, their quadriceps were incredibly sore to the touch, and it was painful to sit from a standing position. What explains this level of soreness following the “hike”? What could they do to help relieve the pain?







Check your answers in Appendix C.










FOCUS ON APPLICATION:
 Clinically Relevant





Muscle Damage and DOMS






While it seems clear that exercise-induced muscle damage is related to the sensation of DOMS, the timelines of recovery from muscle damage and DOMS may be very different. Exercise-induced muscle damage (within the contractile elements, the sarcolemma, and the cytoskeleton) leads to inflammation that is believed responsible for the sensation of pain, tenderness, and stiffness that characterize DOMS and result in impairment of muscle function. In many studies, the sensation of DOMS is used as the primary marker of muscle damage. However, several studies have shown that measures of muscle function do not correspond with the sensation of DOMS. The accompanying figures report changes in maximal isometric force production, plasma levels of CK (representing muscle damage), and sensation of DOMS for 96 hours following 12 maximal eccentric contractions of the elbow flexors.







It can be seen clearly in these graphs that muscle function (strength) was impaired immediately after exercise without an immediate change in plasma CK level or an immediate sensation of pain (measured as a visual analog scale from 0 to 50 mm). On the other hand, by 96 hours after exercise, the sensation of pain was beginning to subside, while the measure of muscle damage remained at its highest level. The lack of a temporal association among DOMS, muscle damage, and muscle function has important implications for athletes and fitness participants alike. Eccentric exercise can cause muscle damage and impairment of muscle function that last far longer than does the sensation of pain or discomfort associated with DOMS. The fact that muscular pain recedes does not guarantee that muscle repair is complete or that function is restored. Thus, it seems prudent to avoid another bout of strenuous eccentric work as soon as pain is no longer a limiting factor. In fact, a hasty return to strenuous work—without adequate recovery time—may be an important factor in overtraining.












Sources:
 
Byrne et al. (2004)

;
 
Nosaka et al. (2002)

;
 
Warren et al. (1999)


.







Repeated Bout Effect


As discussed previously, a single bout of unaccustomed, predominately eccentric exercise causes DOMS, symptoms of muscle damage, and a loss of muscle function. However, it is well established that a repeated bout of similar eccentric exercise results in markedly reduced symptoms of damage compared to the initial bout of exercise. This protective adaptation to a single bout of exercise is referred to as the repeated bout effect
 (McHugh, 2003
; McHugh et al., 1999
; Nosaka and Clarkson, 1995
). The protective adaptation has been shown to last for
 several weeks and possibly up to 6 months when the initial bout of eccentric exercise was performed at near maximal intensity. While the existence of the repeated bout effect is well known, and the conditions necessary to induce it are fairly well characterized, the mechanisms of its protective effect are not well understood (McHugh, 2003
). Recent research suggests decreased inflammation signaling may influence the extent of the repeated bout effect (Xin et al., 2014
), though conflicting reports (Margaritelis et al., 2015
) warrant further investigation into this proposed mechanism.




Measurement of Muscular Function




Accurate measurement of the strength, endurance, and power a muscle can generate is important for five reasons:



1.
 Measurement aids screening to determine the extent of muscle weaknesses and/or imbalances. Both weakness and imbalance can make an individual more prone to injury. Measurement also establishes baseline values for an individual.




2.
 Measurement can be used as a guide to rehabilitation. Measurement of the loss of function after an injury or accident is needed to determine rehabilitation workloads and to monitor progress.




3.
 Measurement is necessary for exercise prescription. Both athletes and fitness participants need realistic programs based on their own performance capabilities.




4.
 Measurement aids selection of the best exercises for working on specific problems.




5.
 Measurement is a research tool for studying which types of training programs produce the greatest changes in muscle function.




Strength
 is the ability of a muscle or muscle group to exert force against a resistance. It is usually measured as one maximal effort. For dynamic resistance exercise, this is often called a one-repetition maximum (1-RM), whereas for static exercise it is referred to as a maximal voluntary contraction (MVC). Torque is the more correct term when movement is made through a range of motion, but strength is the more commonly used term.
 Muscular endurance
 is the ability of a muscle or muscle group to repeatedly exert force against a resistance; the activity is typically performed at a given percentage of the 1-RM (for resistance exercise) or MVC (for static exercise). For example, an exerciser wishing to improve muscle endurance might lift a weight equal to 60% of her 1-RM for 12 repetitions. Similarly, a researcher studying static muscle endurance may ask an individual to hold a handgrip dynamometer at 50% of MVC for 90 seconds.
 Power
 is the amount of work done per unit of time and is the product of force and velocity (P = F × V). Thus, power is the expression of strength exerted quickly.






Strength
 The ability of a muscle or muscle group to exert maximal force against a resistance in a single repetition.



Muscular Endurance
 The ability of a muscle or muscle group to repeatedly exert force against a resistance.



Power
 The amount of work done per unit of time; the product of force and velocity; the ability to exert force quickly.



Electromyography (EMG)
 The measurement of the neural or electrical activity that brings about muscle contraction.





Strength and muscular endurance can be expressed as either absolute or relative values. Absolute values refer to the actual external load commonly measured in pounds (lb), kilograms (kg), newtons (N), or newton-meters (N·m). Relative values are expressed in relation to body weight. Both values are useful. For example, if two individuals are doing a two-arm curl and individual A can lift 70 kg and individual B can lift only 60 kg, it might seem that individual A is stronger. However, if individual A weighs 55 kg and individual B weighs 47 kg, then both are lifting 1.27 kg per kg of body weight—and on a relative basis, neither is considered stronger. When a comparison is made between individuals, a relative expression of strength is generally preferred. In contrast, absolute values are preferred for comparisons made of the same person under different conditions or at different times, for example, before and after a training program.




In terms of muscular endurance, if individual A has a handgrip strength of 70 kg and individual B has a handgrip strength of 60 kg, and both are asked to hold a handgrip dynamometer at 40 kg, you would assume that individual A could do so for a longer period of time, because that load represents 57% MVC (40/70) for individual A and 67% MVC (40/60) for individual B. An absolute load thus puts the weaker individual at a disadvantage. However, if both are asked to hold a load representing a 50% MVC (35 kg for individual A, 30 kg for individual B), you would expect that both individuals could hold that load for the same length of time, assuming equal motivation. To confirm your understanding of the influence of body weight on the expression of strength, complete the
 
Check Your Comprehension 2

 box.







CHECK YOUR COMPREHENSION 2






Listed below are the body weight (BW) and MVC for a handgrip task.









1.
 Calculate the relative strength for each individual (absolute strength ÷ BW).




2.
 Calculate the load that would need to be held for each of the subjects to be working at 50% MVC (absolute strength × 0.5).




3.
 Who is the strongest person on an absolute basis? On a relative basis?




4.
 For whom would 50% MVC represent the most absolute force?






Check your answers in Appendix C.







Laboratory Methods


To quantify the several aspects of muscular function, exercise physiologists use various laboratory and field methods. Laboratory methods are generally more accurate and precise for measuring different aspects of muscular function but are more expensive and inaccessible to many people.


Electromyography



Electromyography (EMG)
 is the measurement of the electrical activity, known as muscle action potentials, that brings about muscle contraction. Motor unit activity can be recorded using needle electrodes, or whole-muscle
 activity can be recorded using surface electrodes. The EMG voltage is proportional to the force of a static contraction, to the tension developed in constant-velocity contractions (Lippold, 1952
), and to velocity in dynamic contractions (Bigland and Lippold, 1954
). Therefore, one can obtain a reasonably valid estimation of tension development in a muscle by EMG.



EMG provides not an absolute value of force or torque but a direct functional indication of muscle activity. If it is plotted against incremental loads or values resulting from a submaximal hold, it can be used to predict strength or endurance, respectively. Such submaximal testing using EMG is particularly important in situations where an individual either cannot or is not motivated to perform maximally. In addition, because weak individuals produce a greater EMG signal than do strong individuals for any absolute load (

Fischer and Merhautova, 1961

), EMG activity can be used to monitor rehabilitation or training progress.




Perhaps the most valuable role of EMG in muscle function assessment is showing which muscles are primarily responsible for specific actions. For example, when training or testing individuals for abdominal strength, an exercise should be selected that maximizes the involvement of the abdominal muscles (the rectus abdominis and the external obliques) and that minimizes the involvement of the hip flexors and thigh muscles (rectus femoris). EMG helps in this selection.




The
 
Check Your Comprehension 3

 box provides an example of the EMG activity of these muscles during a sit-up with the feet supported and unsupported and the knees at various angles (

Hall et al., 1990

;
 
Halpern and Bleck, 1979

). Work through the questions in the box to confirm your understanding.







CHECK YOUR COMPREHENSION 3






Study the EMG data for each of the muscle groups with the feet supported (•) and with the feet unsupported (•), and answer the following questions:









1.
 Does bending the knees eliminate the involvement of thigh muscles (rectus femoris) if the feet are held down? Which muscles are more active if the feet are held—the abdominal or thigh muscles?




2.
 Which muscle group does the angle of knee bend affect most?




3.
 Should the feet be held or not held to maximize the involvement of the abdominal muscles?




4.
 On the basis of your answers in 1–3, which sit-up form (feet held or not held) and which knee angle would you recommend?






Check your answers in Appendix C.







Isokinetic Machines


Isokinetic machines, such as a HUMAC/Cybex or Biodex (Figure 18.13
), allow the velocity of limb movement to be kept nearly constant throughout a contraction. These devices provide accurate and reliable measurements of muscular strength, muscular endurance, and power while
 the speed of the limb is kept constant at a predetermined velocity. Any increase in muscular force results in increased resistance rather than increased acceleration of the limb (Heyward, 1991
). Measurements obtained on isokinetic machines serve as a reference against which other methods of measurement can be compared. These devices can be configured to test the limbs of the upper or the lower body.









FIGURE 18.13
 Isokinetic Exercise Equipment.
 The measurement of isokinetic strength of the quadriceps is recorded throughout the normal range of motion.




Force Transducers


Force transducers measure static strength and endurance. The deformation of the transducer sends an electrical signal to a computer, which displays the force output. When the subject exerts as much force as possible in a single trial, this device measures maximal strength. It can also measure static muscular endurance when the subject holds a given percentage of the predetermined maximal value (%MVC). Static muscular endurance is then calculated by determining either how long the individual can maintain the predetermined value or how long it takes the individual to drop to a specified percentage of the maximal contraction.


Laboratory and Field Methods


Several other methods of measuring muscle function require only relatively simple testing devices. They may be used in a laboratory or field test.


Dynamometers


Dynamometers measure static strength and static muscular endurance. Two commercially available dynamometers are the handgrip dynamometer and the back and leg dynamometer. As force is applied to the dynamometer, its spring is compressed and moves the needle to indicate force produced. Like the force transducer, these devices can be used to measure maximal strength when the subject exerts as much force as possible in a single maximal voluntary contraction (MVC). Because of its availability and ease of administration, the handgrip dynamometer has been extensively used to measure grip strength for all ages. However, it is currently of particular interest as a fitness battery test item for children and adolescents.



Handgrip strength has been shown to be a valid test to assess muscular strength in youth whether evaluated against isometric strength (

Castro-Piñero et al., 2010a

), 1-RM dynamic strength (

Milliken et al., 2008

), or isokinetic strength (

Artero et al., 2012

). Handgrip is currently an item in the ALPHA (Assessing Levels of Physical Activity) health-related fitness test battery for children and adolescents in Europe, CAPL (Canadian Assessment of Physical Literacy Test), and EUROFIT (The European Physical Fitness Test battery) and has been recommended for inclusion in any future surveys of physical fitness in the United States (

Institute of Medicine, 2012

).




Dynamometers can also be used to measure static muscular endurance when the subject performs at a given percentage of the predetermined maximal value. Muscular endurance is then calculated by determining how long the individual can maintain the predetermined (submaximal) value.



Constant Resistance Equipment


The most common method of measuring dynamic strength is to determine the maximal amount an individual can lift in a single repetition against constant resistance using free weight or weight machines. Known as a one-repetition max (1-RM), this is a trial-and-error method of determining how much an individual can lift. If the selected weight is too heavy to be lifted, a lower weight is used. If the weight is successfully lifted, then additional weight is added. Care must be taken because too many trials will cause fatigue, thereby decreasing the true maximal strength value.



Constant resistance equipment can also be used to measure dynamic muscular endurance by determining how many times an individual can lift a submaximal load. The submaximal load is usually a predetermined load (such as the 80-lb bench press test for males or the 35-lb test for females used in the YMCA assessment battery), or it may be expressed as a percentage of body weight or as a percentage of 1-RM.



Field Tests


Several easily administered tests are commonly used in the field to measure muscle function. Common field tests include calisthenic and jumping activities.


Calisthenic Activities


Calisthenic activities are often used in field settings to measure muscular endurance and, to a lesser extent, muscular strength. The most common tests include
 some version of sit-ups or curl-ups, push-ups, and pull-ups or flexed-arm hang. Although these tests are often reported to measure strength, they are in fact usually endurance tests; that is, they measure the maximum number of times an individual can perform a given test (often within a specified time period, such as the number of curl-ups per minute). If the participant can complete more than one repetition, the result represents muscular endurance. If the subject can complete only one repetition (or sometimes no repetitions), the result represents strength (or lack thereof ). Note that these tests indicate relative strength or endurance, because the amount of resistance depends on the individual’s body size and mass.


Vertical Jump/Standing Broad Jump


Jump tests are used to measure the explosive muscular power of the legs. Although they are easy to administer, they are influenced by the individual’s weight. Furthermore, these tests may have a strong neural component and have a definite alactic anaerobic metabolic component (see Chapter 3
). As with handgrip, there is currently considerable interest in these lower body tests of explosive power in children and adolescence as health-related physical fitness test items.



Several studies have attempted to validate these two tests.
 
Milliken et al. (2008)

 found that both jumps related well to 1-RM strength in children.
 
Castro-Piñero et al. (2010b)

 determined that the standing long jump was strongly enough related to the vertical jump and other lower and upper body explosive muscular tests to be considered a general index of muscular fitness in youth.
 
Artero et al. (2012)

 concluded that the standing long jump was valid when compared to isokinetic strength. The standing long jump is currently an item in the ALPHA health-related fitness test battery for children and adolescents in Europe, CAHPER (Canadian Association for Health, Physical Education and Recreation) fitness performance test battery, and EUROFIT, and has been recommended for inclusion in any future surveys of physical fitness in the United States (

Institute of Medicine, 2012

).





The Influence of Age and Sex on Muscle Function




Male-Female Differences


Adult females on average have about 56% of the static strength values of adult males in upper-body locations, about 64% in trunk strength, and about 72% in lower-body locations (Lauback, 1976
). As shown in Figure 18.14
, the variation between upper- and lower-body strength occurs also in the bench press and the leg press (Wells and Plowman, 1983
). Note the considerable overlap in the distribution of leg strength even in untrained males and females (Figure 18.14A
), whereas virtually no overlap exists in arm strength (bench press) distributions (Figure 18.14B
).









FIGURE 18.14
 Frequency Distribution for Leg Press (A) and Bench Press (B) Values for Males and Females before and after a Training Program.
 
 Source: Reprinted from Wells and Plowman (1983), with permission.





Although field tests are not pure tests of muscle function, differences in these tests parallel those seen in strength with growth and maturation and between boys and girls.
 
Figure 18.15A and B

 illustrates these relationships for the flexed-arm hang and the standing long jump respectively. Adult performances also appear to parallel adolescent male-female strength differences.
 
Figure 18.16A

 shows that throughout the adult age span, both inactive and active males can perform more push-ups than active or inactive females. With a leg-lift exercise (Figure 18.16B), however, the performance gap is smaller, with considerable overlap between inactive males and active females.










FIGURE 18.15
 Performance on Field Tests of Muscular Function in Children.
 A.
 Flexed-arm hang (muscular endurance). B.
 Standing long jump (muscular power). Source: Malina and Bouchard (2004). Copyright 2004 Robert M. Malina and Claude Bouchard. Reprinted by permission.











FIGURE 18.16
 Performance on Field Tests of Muscular Function in Adults.
 A.
 Push-up (muscular endurance). B.
 Leg lifts. Source: Israel (1992). Copyright 1992 by International Olympic Committee. Reprinted by permission.





Why do these differences occur? Strength and other muscle functions increase as children grow because muscle mass increases in parallel with increases in body mass. Pubertal hormonal changes—particularly in testosterone, which is involved with the anabolic process of muscle growth—favor males. While young males are adding muscle mass under the influence of testosterone, young females are adding fat under the influence of estrogen (

Figure 18.17

) (

Malina and Bouchard, 2004

). The similarities among the graphic representations of fat-free mass (

Figure 18.17A

), strength (

Figure 18.18

), and muscle performance (

Figure 18.15

) are striking, leading to the conclusion that the quantity of muscle mass is what accounts for the difference in the expression of strength.










FIGURE 18.17
 Growth Curves for Mass and Percent Fat in Children.
 A.
 Mass. B.
 Fat. Source: From Malina et al. (2004); Growth curves for Fat (B)
: Data from Malina (1989) and Malina et al. (1988). Reprinted with permission.











FIGURE 18.18
 Strength Development in Boys and Girls.
 A.
 Grip strength in young children. B.
 Pull strength in children 6–18 years old. C.
 Biceps strength. D.
 Quadriceps strength. Source: Malina et al. (2004); Data for Gripping and Pulling from Malina and Roche (1983); Data for biceps from Rodahl et al. (1961). Data for quadriceps from Bouchard et al. (unpublished). Reprinted with permission
.




That it is muscle quantity rather than quality that is responsible for these male-female inequities is emphasized by calculating relative strength values (Wells and Plowman, 1983
; Wilmore, 1974
). In one study, the percentage of handgrip strength exhibited by the females in relation to the males increased from 57% in absolute strength terms to relative values of 73% (absolute strength divided by total body weight) and 83% (absolute strength divided by lean body mass) (Wilmore, 1974
). For the bench press, the corresponding figures were 37%, 46%, and 53%, and for the leg press, they were 73%, 92%, and 106%. Thus, in leg strength relative to lean body mass, female performance actually exceeded that of males.



In addition, studies relating strength to cross-sectional area of muscle show no inequities between the sexes. Overall then, all these studies show that the larger size of males in general, their greater muscle mass, and their larger fiber size are physiologically responsible for their greater strength, rather than any inherent difference in the potential or function of the muscle fibers per se.




Another important factor is cultural expectations. Many adolescent girls become less active as they grow up, detraining to some extent. Some detraining may be anatomically selective. Although males and females of all ages experience gravity equally when walking, climbing stairs, sitting down, and standing up, individuals can selectively avoid upper-body activities, such as lifting heavy loads, opening jars, hammering, and weight lifting. Thus, differences in upper-body versus lower-body activities in males and females may in part be cultural. Future studies may note a change in these relationships as more girls have the opportunity to enter sports at an early age and continue to be active into middle age and old age.



Children and Adolescents


Strength generally develops in humans from infancy through maturity. Figure 18.18
 shows a common pattern
 of development. Strength increases rectilinearly from early childhood (3–7 years) through early adolescence (13–14 years) for both sexes. A marked increase in strength then occurs during the rest of adolescence and into early adulthood (15–20 years) for boys. Girls, however, do not have an accelerated increase in strength in late adolescence. They either maintain a slow rectilinear rise, as shown for grip strength (Figure 18.18B
), or decline after age 16, as shown for both elbow flexion and knee extension (Figure 18.18C
 and D
) (Malina and Bouchard, 2004
). The increase in strength during childhood and adolescence, even without training, is more than can be accounted for just from growth in size, although other causative factors have not been determined. In males, the average muscle mass increases from 42% at age 5 to 53% at age 17 years of total body mass. In females, comparable values are 41% at age 5 and 42% at age 17 (Rowland, 2005
). This growth occurs by increasing protein content in the existing muscle fibers, not by increasing the number of muscle fibers.



In early childhood, there is virtually no difference in strength measurements between boys and girls. As puberty begins and progresses though, a gap appears and progressively widens. On the average, at 11–12 years of age, girls have approximately 90% of boys’ strength; at 13–14 years, this percentage has decreased to 80% and at 15–16 years, to 75%. These percentages vary not only with age but also with the muscle group being measured. Because most research documents static strength measures in children and adolescents, there is still a clear need to measure and interpret isokinetic muscle strength and muscle power during growth and maturation (

De Ste Croix et al., 2003

;
 
Van Praagh and Doré, 2002

).




During physical activity, muscular contractions place force on bone leading to structural adaptations in bone (see
 
Chapter 016

). Researchers have found that muscle power, assessed by a vertical jump, has strong and consistent positive associations with bone strength in adolescent boys and girls (

Janz et al., 2015

). These findings support the use of the vertical jump in a comprehensive assessment of health-related physical fitness.



Older Adults


Aging is associated with a loss of contractile muscle mass resulting in impaired contractile function and performance. The loss of muscle mass associated with aging is called sarcopenia
. Although aging is always associated with loss of muscle mass and function, there is ample evidence that lifelong activity has the potential to mitigate the loss of muscle mass and function (Power et al., 2013
). It is becoming increasingly clear that changes in muscle function with aging are multidimensional and include qualitative features about the structure and function of contractile tissue in addition to quantitative measures of the amount of muscle mass (Fragala et al., 2015
).





Sarcopenia
 The loss of contractile muscle mass associated with aging.





Significant declines in muscular strength in both males and females are well documented from middle age to old age, but the rate of loss varies substantially among muscle groups (

Rogers and Evans, 1993

).
 
Figure 18.19

 shows a generalized change in strength (grip strength) over the normal lifespan for males and females (

Komi, 1992

). From the peak values in late adolescence or early adulthood, strength is maintained until approximately 45–50 years, followed by a fairly gradual decline into and beyond the 70s. The decline in muscle strength generally amounts to about 15% per decade in the sixth and seventh decades of life and 30% per decade after that (

Rogers and Evans, 1993

). Relative static endurance (at ~40–50% MVC) is similar between older and younger individuals.
 
Figures 18.16

 and
 
18.19

 show parallel declines in performance and show that different muscle groups decline at different rates, even between the sexes.










FIGURE 18.19
 Theoretical Maximal Handgrip Strength. 






What causes the age-related decline in strength? Three possibilities are (1) a loss of muscle mass, (2) a loss of mechanical or contractile properties (fiber type changes, fiber size changes, fiber number changes), and/or (3) reduced activation of motor units or denervation.




Muscle mass is clearly lost with age. Between the ages of 30 and 70 years, almost 25% of muscle mass is lost in both males and females (

Rogers and Evans, 1993

).

 This reduces force production. Some evidence, however, supports the contention that the decline in strength with aging is greater than can be accounted for just by the loss of muscle mass. The capacity to exert force per unit of cross-sectional area also declines (

Rogers and Evans, 1993

).




Early studies using traditional biopsy techniques seemed to show a preferential loss of FT and, especially, FG fibers. Since these are the high-force fibers, this result was intuitively logical. More definitive studies using whole-muscle cross-sectional techniques have shown, however, that both ST and FT fibers are lost equally with aging (

Lexell et al., 1988

).




As shown in
 
Figure 18.20

, the loss of muscle fibers begins at about age 30, and by age 80, a reduction of

 between 25% and 40% has occurred in females and males (

Rogers and Evans, 1993

). The genetically predetermined percentages of ST and FT fibers remain constant. The SO fibers appear to maintain their size longer than do FT fibers. Thus, although FT fibers are not lost at a faster rate than SO fibers, they do atrophy faster, and FG fibers atrophy faster than do FOG fibers. Since FT fibers are generally the larger fibers, the preferential loss in size of these fibers largely accounts for the overall decrease in muscle size and strength with aging.










FIGURE 18.20
 Loss of Muscle Fibers with Age.
 Source: Rogers and Evans (1993). Reprinted by permission.





Of great concern is the practical meaning of these changes. Weakened respiratory muscles restrict aerobic activity. Weakened muscles around joints lead to instability, difficulty in restoring balance, and a greater potential for falls (

Aoyagi and Shephard, 1992

). Insufficient strength to get in and out of chairs, carry groceries, or take caps off medicine or food jars can lead to a loss of independent living. The most effective way to prevent these difficulties is systematic exercise training. Muscle aging cannot be prevented but can be delayed. Thus, maintaining and/or increasing muscular strength, endurance, and power is important for different reasons throughout the life span. Nonetheless, muscles respond to exercise training in basically the same fashion at all ages; that is, trained muscles produce greater force.







FOCUS ON APPLICATION






Effect of Different Training Programs on Muscle Size and Strength






The cross-sectional area of muscle is related to the force it can generate. This implies that if a training program causes muscle hypertrophy (increase in size), it will also result in increased strength. However, there is considerable uncertainty about the optimal training program for improving muscle strength, and it has been speculated that not all populations may experience muscle hypertrophy. Postmenopausal women who are estrogen deficient, for example, may benefit tremendously from increased strength because independent living is related to strength. Yet it has not been established how this group would respond to different resistance training programs. Bemben et al. (2000)
 investigated the effects of high-load (80% of 1-RM; 8 reps) and high-repetition (40% of 1-RM; 16 reps) resistance training protocols on the musculoskeletal system of early postmenopausal, estrogen-deficient females. The accompanying graphs display changes in only two of the many variables investigated: rectus femoris muscle cross-sectional area (CSA) (measured by ultrasound) and leg press strength.







These graphs show that both training protocols effectively increased muscle strength (measured by the leg press) and increased muscle cross-sectional area (CSA). Based on these and other data, these authors concluded that both high-load and high-repetition resistance training programs are effective for improving muscular strength and size in postmenopausal women. This finding is important for exercise professionals because it indicates that postmenopausal women do adapt positively to exercise training and that a low-intensity, high-repetition training program can be beneficial for developing muscular fitness in women for whom a high-intensity program may not be appropriate.












Source:
 
Bemben et al. (2000)

.









SUMMARY





1.
 Muscle tension is the force developed when a contracting muscle acts on an object. Load is the force exerted on the muscle by the object. For a muscle to move a load, muscle tension must exceed the force of the load.




2.
 In isotonic contractions of muscle fibers, force production is constant as the muscle fiber contracts. In the intact human system, such a contraction is practically impossible. Instead, the load is constant but the force needed to move it through the range of motion is not. Thus, the term dynamic more accurately describes contraction within the intact human.




3.
 If movement results from a contraction in which muscle shortening occurs, it is a concentric dynamic contraction. If movement results from a contraction in which muscle lengthening occurs, the contraction is referred to as an eccentric dynamic contraction.




4.
 In isokinetic contractions of muscle fibers, the velocity of contraction is constant. In the intact human, the velocity of movement varies with joint angle. Specialized equipment can hold the rate of limb displacement constant, resulting in isokinematic contraction.




5.
 A muscle fiber contraction that does not result in a meaningful length change in the muscle fiber is

 termed isometric. An intact fiber has an elastic element, such that some fiber shortening actually occurs with contraction even though no limb displacement occurs. Thus, the term static is preferable to isometric to describe this type of contraction in humans.




6.
 The amount of force produced by muscles depends on neural and mechanical factors. Important mechanical factors include length-tension-angle relationships, force-velocity relationships, elasticity-force relationships, and architectural design.




7.
 Muscular fatigue may be caused by a variety of factors, which can be described as central or peripheral, or as electrophysiological or biochemical in nature. The cause is determined largely by the muscle fiber type and therefore varies with different types of activity. Muscular fatigue results in a loss of muscle function.




8.
 Muscular soreness probably results from a combination of mechanical trauma, muscle damage, and inflammation.




9.
 Differences in strength between the sexes are largely due to the greater muscle mass of males. The magnitude of the difference in strength between males and females depends on the absolute or relative expressions of strength, the region of the body where strength is measured, and the training status of the individuals.




10.
 Strength development occurs from infancy through maturity. The increase in strength during childhood and adolescence is more than can be accounted for just from growth in size.




11.
 Muscular strength declines in both males and females from middle age to old age, due in part to loss in both ST and FT fibers. Aging of muscles cannot be prevented, but loss of strength can be delayed with appropriate exercise training.





Review Questions









1.
  Define isotonic, isokinetic, and isometric contractions. Discuss how they relate to dynamic and static contractions.




2.
  Diagram the force-length relationship in a muscle fiber. Diagram a strength curve for biceps flexion, knee flexion, and knee extension. Discuss the relationship between force and length in the muscle fiber and in the whole muscle.




3.
  Graph the force-velocity relationship in (a) a muscle fiber and in (b) a whole muscle. Identify the eccentric contraction on graph (a) and identify a static contraction on graph (b).




4.
  Create a schematic representation of the possible sites of muscular fatigue.




5.
  Indicate the most probable cause of muscle fatigue for the following categories of exercise: long-term, moderate to heavy, submaximal aerobic, incremental aerobic exercise to maximum, static, dynamic resistance, and very short-term, high-intensity anaerobic exercise.




6.
  Discuss the integrated model of delayed-onset muscle soreness (DOMS). How can DOMS be prevented or treated?




7.
  What are the primary laboratory methods for measuring muscular function? What are the primary field tests to measure muscular function? What are the limitations of these methods? What determines the appropriate test to administer?




8.
  Compare male and female strength development during childhood and adolescence.




9.
  Discuss differences in strength between adult males and females. How is the difference in strength affected by absolute or relative units used to express strength? How do differences vary among different regions of the body? What are the most likely causes of sex-related differences in muscular function?




10.
  What factors account for the age-related decline in muscular strength? Can this loss be minimized or slowed? If so, how?









For further review and study tools, visit http://thePoint.lww.com/Plowman5e
 
.






REFERENCES





Aagaard, P
., &
 J. Bangsbo
:
 The muscular system: Design, function, and performance relationships
. In
 ACSM’s Advanced Exercise Physiology
.
 Philadelphia, PA
:
 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
,
 144
–
160
 (
2006
).




Aoyagi, Y
., &
 R. J. Shephard
:
 Aging and muscle function
.
 Sports Medicine.
 14
(
6
):
376
–
396
 (
1992
).




Armstrong, R. B.
:
 Mechanisms of exercise-induced delayed onset muscular soreness: A brief review
.
 Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise.
 16
(
6
):
529
–
538
 (
1984
).




Armstrong, R. B.
,
 M. H. Laughlin
,
 L. Rome
, &
 C. R. Taylor
:
 Metabolism of rats running up and down an incline
.
 Journal of Applied Physiology.
 55
:
518
–
521
 (
1983
).




Artero, E. G.
,
 V. España-Romero
,
 J. Castro-Piñero
, et al.:
 Criterion-related validity of field-based muscular fitness tests in youth
.
 Journal of Sports Medicine and Physical Fitness.
 52
:
 263
–
272
 (
2012
).




Ascensão, A
.,
 A. Rebelo
,
 E. Oliveira
,
 F. Marques
,
 L. Pereira
, &
 J. Magalhães
:
 Biochemical impact of a soccer match—analysis of oxidative stress and muscle damage markers throughout recovery
.
 Clinical Biochemistry.
 41
:
841
–
851
 (
2008
).




Asmussen, E
.:
 Observations on experimental muscular soreness
.
 Acta Rheumatologica Scandinavica.
 2
:
109
–
116
 (
1956
).




Astorino, T. A.
, &
 D. W. Roberson
:
 Efficacy of acute caffeine ingestion for short-term high-intensity exercise performance: A systematic review
.
 Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research.
 24
(
1
):
257
–
265
 (
2010
).




Avela, J
.,
 H. Kyröläinen
,
 P. V. Komi
, &
 D. Rama
:
 Reduced flex sensitivity persists several days after long-lasting stretch-shortening cycle exercise
.
 Journal of Applied Physiology.
 86
(
4
):
 1292
–
1300
 (
1999
).




Bangsbo, J
.,
 M. Mohr
, &
 P. Krustrup
:
 Physical and metabolic demands of training and match-play in the elite football player
.
 Journal of Sports Sciences.
 24
(
7
):
665
–
674
 (
2006
).




Beck, T. W.
,
 T. J. Housh
,
 R. J. Schmidt
,
 G. O. Johnson
,
 D. J. Housh
,
 J. W. Coburn
, &
 M. H. Malek
:
 
The acute effects of a caffeine-containing supplement on strength, muscular

 endurance, and anaerobic capabilities

.
 Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research.
 18
(
1
):
506
–
510
 (
2006
).




Beliard, S
.,
 M. Chauveau
,
 T. Moscatiello
,
 F. Cros
,
 F. Ecarnot
, &
 F. Becker
:
 Compression garments and exercise: No influence of pressure applied
.
 Journal of Sport Science and Medicine.
 14
:
75
–
83
 (
2015
).




Bemben, D. A.
,
 N. L. Fetters
,
 M. G. Bemben
,
 N. Nabavi
, &
 E. T. Koh
:
 Musculoskeletal responses to high- and low-intensity resistance in early menopausal women
.
 Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise.
 32
(
11
):
1949
–
1957
 (
2000
).




Bigland, B
., &
 O. C. J. Lippold
:
 The relation between force, velocity, and integrated electrical activity in human muscles
.
 The Journal of Physiology.
 123
:
214
–
224
 (
1954
).




Bonde-Petersen, F
.,
 H. G. Knuttgen
, &
 J. Henriksson
:
 Muscle metabolism during exercise with concentric and eccentric contractions
.
 Journal of Applied Physiology.
 33
:
792
–
795
 (
1972
).




Byrne, C
., &
 R. Eston
:
 Maximal intensity isometric and dynamic exercise performance following eccentric muscle actions
.
 Journal of Sports Sciences.
 20
(
12
):
951
–
959
 (
2002
).




Byrne, C
.,
 C. Twist
, &
 R. Eston
:
 Neuromuscular function after exercise-induced muscle damage
.
 Sports Medicine.
 34
(
1
):
 49
–
69
 (
2004
).




Cairns, S. P.
:
 Lactic acid and exercise performance: Culprit or friend?
 Sports Medicine.
 36
(
4
):
279
–
291
 (
2006
).




Castro-Piñero, J
.,
 E. G. Artero
,
 V. España-Romero
,
 F. B. Ortega
,
 M. Sjöström
,
 J. Suni
, &
 J. R. Ruiz
:
 Criterion-related validity of field-based fitness tests in youth: A systematic review
.
 British Journal of Sports Medicine.
 44
:
934
–
943
 (
2010a
).




Castro-Piñero, J
.,
 F. B. Ortega
,
 E. G. Artero
,
 M. J. Birela-Rejón
,
 J. Mora
,
 M. Sjöström
, &
 J. R. Ruiz
:
 Assessing muscular strength in youth: Usefulness of standing long jump as a general index of muscular fitness
.
 Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research.
 24
(
7
):
1810
–
1817
 (
2010b
).




Cheung, K
.,
 P. A. Hume
, &
 L. Maxwell
:
 Delayed onset muscle soreness: Treatment strategies and performance factors
.
 Sports Medicine.
 33
(
2
):
145
–
164
 (
2003
).




Conley, M
.:
 Bioenergetics of exercise training
. In
 Baechle, T. R.
, &
 R. W. Earle
 (eds.):
 Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning
.
 Champaign, IL
:
 Human Kinetics
,
 73
–
90
 (
2000
).




Coyle, E. F.
,
 D. L. Costill
, &
 G. R. Lesmes
:
 Leg extension power and muscle fiber composition
.
 Medicine and Science in Sports.
 11
(
1
):
12
–
15
 (
1976
).




Davies, C. T. M.
, &
 C. Barnes
:
 Negative (eccentric) work. II. Physiological responses to walking uphill and downhill on motor-driven treadmill.
 Ergonomics.
 15
:
121
–
131
 (
1972
).




De Ste Croix, M. B. A.
,
 M. A. Deighan
, &
 N. Armstrong
:
 Assessment and interpretation of isokinetic muscle strength during growth and maturation
.
 Sports Medicine.
 33
(
10
):
 727
–
743
 (
2003
).




DeVries, H. A.
, &
 T. J. Housh
:
 Physiology of Exercise: For Physical Education, Athletics and Exercise Science
.
 Madison, WI
:
 Brown & Benchmark
 (
1994
).




Edington, D. W.
, &
 V. R. Edgerton
:
 The Biology of Physical Activity
.
 Boston, MA
:
 Houghton Mifflin
,
 282
 (
1976
).




Edman, K. A. P.
:
 Contractile performance of skeletal muscle fibers
. In
 Komi, P. V.
 (ed.):
 Strength and Power in Sport
.
 Boston, MA
:
 Blackwell Scientific
,
 96
–
114
 (
1992
).




Enoka, R. M.
:
 Neuromechanical Basis of Kinesiology
.
 Champaign, IL
:
 Human Kinetics
,
 31
–
64
 (
1988
).




Enoka, R. M.
, &
 J. Duchateau
:
 Muscle fatigue: What, why and how it influences muscle function
.
 The Journal of Physiology.
 586
(
1
):
11
–
23
 (
2008
).




Fischer, A
., &
 J. Merhautova
:
 Electromyographic manifestations of individual stages of adapted sports technique
. In
 Health and Fitness in the Modern World
.
 Chicago, IL
:
 Athletic Institute
,
 134
–
147
 (
1961
).




Fitts, R. H.
:
 The cross-bridge cycle and skeletal muscle fatigue
.
 Journal of Applied Physiology.
 104
:
551
–
558
 (
2008
).




Fitts, R. H.
:
 The muscular system: Fatigue process
. In
 ACSM’s Advanced Exercise Physiology
 (
2nd ed.
).
 Philadelphia, PA
:
 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
,
 178
–
196
 (
2012
).




Fragala, M. S.
,
 A. M. Kenny
, &
 G. A. Kuchel
:
 Muscle quality in aging: A multi-dimensional approach to muscle functioning with applications for treatment
.
 Sports Medicine.
 45
:
641
–
658
 (
2015
).




Ganio, M. S.
,
 J. F. Klau
,
 D. J. Casa
,
 L. E. Armstrong
, &
 C. M. Maresh
:
 Effect of caffeine on sport-specific endurance performance: A systemic review
.
 Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research.
 23
(
1
):
315
–
324
 (
2009
).




Goldspink, G
.:
 Cellular and molecular aspects of adaptation in skeletal muscles
. In
 Komi, P. V.
 (ed.):
 Strength and Power in Sport
.
 Boston, MA
:
 Blackwell Scientific
,
 211
–
229
 (
1992
).




Goldstein, E. R.
,
 T. Ziegenfuss
,
 D. Kalman
, et al.:
 International society of sports nutrition position stand: Caffeine and performance
.
 Journal of International Society of Sports Nutrition.
 7
:
5
 (
2010
).




Grassi, B
.,
 H. B. Rossiter
, &
 J. A. Zoladz
:
 Skeletal muscle fatigue and decreased efficiency: Two sides of the same coin?
 Exercise and Sports Sciences Reviews.
 43
(
2
):
75
–
83
 (
2015
).




Hall, S. J.
,
 J. Lee
, &
 T. M. Wood
:
 Evaluation of selected sit-up variations for the individual with low back pain
.
 Journal of Applied Sport Science Research.
 4
(
2
):
42
–
46
 (
1990
).




Halpern, A. A.
, &
 E. E. Bleck
:
 Sit-up exercises: An electromyographic study
.
 Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research.
 145
:
172
–
178
 (
1979
).




Hargreaves, M
.:
 Exercise, muscle, and CHO metabolism
.
 Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports.
 25
(
Suppl. 4
):
 29
–
33
 (
2015
).




Hawley, J. A.
, &
 J. L. Leckey
:
 Carbohydrate dependence during prolonged, intense endurance exercise
.
 Sports Medicine.
 45
(
Suppl. 1
):
S5
–
12
 (
2015
).




Heyward, V. H.
:
 Advanced Fitness Assessment and Exercise Prescription
.
 Champaign, IL
:
 Human Kinetics
 (
1991
).




Hill, J
.,
 G. Howatson
,
 K. VanSomeren
,
 J. Leeder
, &
 C. Pedlar
:
 Compression garments and recovery from exercise-induced muscle damage: A meta-analysis
.
 British Journal of Sports Medicine.
 48
(
18
):
1340
–
1346
 (
2014
).




Institute of Medicine
:
 Fitness Measures and Health Outcomes in Youth
.
 Washington, DC
:
 The National Academies Press
 (
2012
).




Israel, S
.:
 Age-related changes in strength and special groups
. In Komi, P. V. (ed.):
 Strength and Power in Sport.
 Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics,
 323
 (
1992
).




Janz, K. F.
,
 E. M. Letuchy
,
 T. L. Burns
,
 S. L. Francis
, &
 S. M. Levy
:
 Muscle power predicts adolescent bone strength: Iowa bone development study
.
 Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise.
 47
(
10
):
2201
–
2206
 (
2015
).




Kent-Braun, J. A.
,
 R. H. Fitts
, &
 A. Christie
:
 Skeletal muscle fatigue
.
 Comprehensive Physiology.
 2
(
2
):
997
–
1044
 (
2012
).




Komi, P. V.
:
 Physiological and biomechanical correlates of muscle function: Effects of muscle structure and stretch-shortening cycle of force and speed
. In
 Terjung, R
. (ed.):
 Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews
 (
Vol. 12
).
 Lexington, MA
:
 Collamore Press
,
 81
–
122
 (
1984
)

.




Komi, P. V.
:
 Stretch-shortening cycle
. In
 Komi, P
. (ed.):
 Strength and Power in Sport
.
 London, UK
:
 Blackwell Scientific
,
 169
–
180
 (
1992
).




Krustrup, P
.,
 G. Ermidis
, &
 M. Mohr
:
 Sodium bicarbonate intake improves high-intensity intermittent exercise performance in trained young men
.
 Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition.
 12
:
25
 (
2015
).




Kulig, K
.,
 J. G. Andrews
, &
 J. G. Hay
:
 Human strength curves
. In
 Terjung, R
. (ed.):
 Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews
 (
Vol. 12
).
 Lexington, MA
:
 Collamore Press
,
 417
–
466
 (
1984
).




Lamb, G. D.
,
 D. G. Stephenson
,
 J. Bangsbo
, &
 C. Juel
:
 Point: Counterpoint: Lactic acid accumulation is an advantage/disadvantage of muscle activity
.
 Journal of Applied Physiology.
 100
(
4
):
1410
–
1412
 (
2006
).




Lauback, L. L.
:
 Comparative muscle strength of men and women: A review of the literature
.
 Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine
.
 47
:
534
–
542
 (
1976
).




Lexell, J
.,
 C. C. Taylor
, &
 M. Sjöström
:
 What is the cause of the ageing atrophy? Total number, size and proportion of different fiber types studied in whole vastus lateralis muscle from 15- to 83-year-old men
.
 Journal of Neurological Sciences.
 84
(
2–3
):
275
–
294
 (
1988
).




Lippold, D. C. J.
:
 The relation between integrated action potentials in a human muscle and its isometric tension
.
 Journal of Physiology.
 117
:
492
–
499
 (
1952
).




MacLaren, D. P.
,
 H. Gibson
,
 M. Parry-Billings
, &
 R. H. T. Edwards
:
 A review of metabolic and physiological factors in fatigue
.
 Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews.
 17
:
29
–
66
 (
1989
).




Malina, R. M.
:
 Growth and maturation: Normal variation and effects of training
. In
 Gisolfi, C. V.
, &
 D. R. Lamb
 (eds.):
 Perspectives in Exercise Science and Sports Medicine: Youth, Exercise, and Sport
 (
Vol. 2
).
 Indianapolis, IN
:
 Benchmark Press
,
 223
–
265
 (
1989
).




Malina, R. M.
, &
 C. Bouchard
:
 Growth, Maturation, and Physical Activity
. (2nd ed.).
 Champaign, IL
:
 Human Kinetics
 (
2004
).




Malina, R. M.
, &
 A. F. Roche
:
 Manual of Physical Status and Performance in Childhood: Physical performance
 (
Vol. 2
).
 New York, NY
:
 Plenum
 (
1983
).




Malina, R. M.
,
 C. Bouchard
, &
 G. Beunen
:
 Human growth: Selected aspects of current research on well-nourished children
.
 Annual Review of Anthropology.
 17
:
187
–
219
 (
1988
).




Margaritelis N.V.
,
 A. A. Theodorou
,
 V. Balzopoulos
,
 C. N. Maganaris
,
 V. Paschalis
,
 A. Kyparos
, &
 M. G. Nikolaidis
:
 Muscle damage and inflammation after eccentric exercise: Can the repeated bout effect be removed?
 Physiological Reports
.
 3
:
12
 (
2015
).




McGlynn, G. H.
,
 N. T. Laughlin
, &
 V. Rowe
:
 Effect of electromyographic feedback and static stretching on artificially induced muscle soreness
.
 American Journal of Physical Medicine.
 58
:
139
–
148
 (
1979
).




McHugh, M. P.
:
 Recent advances in the understanding of the repeated bout effect: The protective effect against muscle damage from a single bout of eccentric exercise
.
 Scandinavian Journal of Medicine and Science in Sports.
 13
:
 88
–
97
 (
2003
).




McHugh, M. P.
,
 D. A. J. Connonlly
,
 R. G. Eston
, &
 G. W. Gleim
:
 Exercise-induced muscle damage and potential mechanisms for the repeated bout effect
.
 Sports Medicine.
 27
(
3
):
157
–
170
 (
1999
).




Meeusen, R
.,
 P. Watson
,
 H. Hasegawa
,
 B. Roelands
, &
 M. F. Piacentini
:
 Central fatigue: The serotonin hypothesis and beyond
.
 Sports Medicine.
 36
(
10
):
881
–
909
 (
2006
).




Milliken, L. A.
,
 A. D. Faigenbaum
,
 R. L. Loud
, &
 W. L. Westcott
:
 Correlates of upper and lower body muscular strength in children
.
 Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research.
 22
(
4
):
 1339
–
1346
 (
2008
).




Murase, S
.,
 E. Terazawa
,
 F. Queme
, et al.:
 Bradykinin and nerve growth factor play pivotal roles in muscular mechanical hyperalgesia after exercise (delayed-onset muscle soreness)
.
 The Journal of Neuroscience.
 30
(
10
):
3752
–
3761
 (
2010
).




National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) Workshop Summary
.
 American Review of Respiratory Diseases.
 142
:
 474
–
480
 (
1990
).




Newsholme, E. A.
,
 I. Acworth
, &
 E. Blomstrand
.
 Amino-acids, brain neurotransmitters and a functional link between muscle and brain that is important in sustained exercise
. In
 Benzi, G
. (ed.):
 Advances in Biochemistry
.
 London, UK
:
 John Libbey Eurotext Ltd
.,
 127
–
133
 (
1987
).




Nicol, C
.,
 J. Avela
, &
 A. V. Komi
:
 The strength-shortening cycle: A model to study naturally occurring neuromuscular fatigue
.
 Sports Medicine.
 36
(
11
):
977
–
99
 (
2006
).




Nocella, M
.,
 B. Colombini
,
 G. Benelli
,
 G. Cecchi
,
 M. A. Bagni
, &
 J. Bruton
:
 Force decline during fatigue is due to both a decrease in the force per individual cross-bridge and the number of cross-bridges
.
 Journal of Physiology.
 589
(
13
):
 3371
–
381
 (
2011
).




Nosaka, K
., &
 P. M. Clarkson
:
 Muscle damage following repeated bouts of high force eccentric exercise
.
 Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise.
 27
(
9
):
1263
–
1269
 (
1995
).




Nosaka, K
.,
 M. Newton
, &
 P. Sacco
:
 Muscle damage and soreness after endurance exercise of the elbow flexors
.
 Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise
.
 34
(6):
920
–
927
 (
2002
).




Nybo, L
.:
 CNS fatigue and prolonged exercise: Effect of glucose supplementation
.
 Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise.
 35
(
4
):
589
–
594
 (
2003
).




Nybo, L
., &
 B. Nielsen
:
 Hyperthermia and central fatigue during prolonged exercise in humans
.
 Journal of Applied Physiology.
 91
:
1055
–
1060
 (
2001
).




Pasiakos, S. M.
,
 H. R. Lieberman
, &
 T. M. McLellan
:
 Effects of protein supplements on muscle damage, soreness and recovery of muscle function and physical performance: A systematic review
.
 Sports Medicine.
 44
(
5
):
 655
–
670
 (
2014
).




Peake, J
.,
 K. Nosaka
, &
 K. Suzuki
:
 Characterization of inflammatory responses to eccentric exercise in humans
.
 Exercise Immunology Review.
 11
:
64
–
85
 (
2005
).




Power, G.A.
,
 B.H. Dalton
, &
 C.L. Rice
:
 Human neuromuscular structure and function in old age: A brief review
.
 Journal of Sport and Health Science.
 2
(
4
):
1
–
12
 (
2013
).




Rodahl, K
.,
 P.-O. Åstrand
,
 N. C. Birkhead
,
 T. Hettinger
,
 B. Issekutz
,
 D. M. Jones
, &
 R. Weaver
:
 Physical work capacity: A study of some children and young adults in the United States
.
 Archives of Environmental Health.
 2
:
499
–
510
 (
1961
).




Rogers, M. A.
, &
 W. J. Evans
:
 Changes in skeletal muscle with aging: Effects of exercise training
. In
 Holloszy, J. O.
 (ed.):
 Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews
 (
Vol. 21
).
 Baltimore, MD
:
 Williams & Wilkins
,
 65
–
102
 (
1993
).




Rowland, T. W.
:
 Children’s Exercise Physiology
. (
2nd ed.
).
 Champaign, IL
:
 Human Kinetics
 (
2005
).




Sale, D. S.
:
 Neural adaptations to strength training
. In
 Komi, P. V.
 (ed.):
 Strength and Power in Sport
.
 Boston, MA
:
 Blackwell Scientific
,
 249
–
265
 (
1992
).




Sayers, S. P.
, &
 P. M. Clarkson
:
 Force recovery after eccentric exercise in males and females
.
 European Journal of Applied Physiology.
 84
(1–2):
122
–
126
 (
2001
)

.




Shimomura, Y
.,
 A. Inaguma
,
 S. Watanabe
, et al.:
 Branched-chain amino acid supplementation before squat exercise and delayed-onset muscle soreness
.
 International Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism.
 20
:
236
–
244
 (
2010
).




Smith, L. L.
:
 Acute inflammation: The underlying mechanism in delayed onset muscle soreness?
 Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise.
 23
(
5
):
542
–
551
 (
1991
).




Smith, L. L.
:
 Cytokine hypothesis of overtraining
.
 Medicine & Science in Sport & Exercise.
 32
(
2
):
317
–
331
 (
2000
).




Stauber, W. T.
:
 Eccentric action of muscles: Physiology, injury, and adaptation
.
 Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews.
 17
:
157
–
186
 (
1989
).




Stone, M. H.
,
 D. Collins
,
 S. Plisk
,
 G. Haff
, &
 M. E. Stone
:
 Training principles: Evaluation of modes and methods of resistance training
.
 National Strength and Conditioning Journal.
 22
(
3
):
65
–
76
 (
2000
).




Tarnopolsky, M. A.
:
 Effect of caffeine on the neuromuscular system-potential as an ergogenic aid
.
 Applied Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism.
 33
:
1284
–
1289
 (
2008
).




Umbel, J. D.
,
 R. L. Hoffman
,
 D. J. Dearth
,
 G. S. Chleboun
,
 T. M. Manini
, &
 B. C. Clark
:
 Delayed-onset muscle soreness induced by low-load blood flow-restricted exercise
.
 European Journal of Applied Physiology.
 107
(
6
):
687
–
695
 (
2009
).




Vaile, J
.,
 S. Halson
,
 N. Gill
, &
 B. Dawson
:
 Effect of hydrotherapy on the signs and symptoms of delayed onset muscle soreness
.
 European Journal of Physiology.
 102
:
447
–
455
 (
2008
).




Van Praagh, E
., &
 E. Doré
:
 Short-term muscle power during growth and maturation
.
 Sports Medicine.
 32
(
11
):
701
–
728
 (
2002
).




Warren, G. L.
,
 D. A. Lowe
, &
 R. B. Armstrong
:
 Measurement tools used in the study of eccentric contraction-induced injury
.
 Sports Medicine.
 27
(
1
):
43
–
59
 (
1999
).




Wells, C. L.
, &
 S. A. Plowman
:
 Sexual differences in athletic performance: Biological or behavioral?
 The Physician and Sports Medicine.
 11
(
8
):
52
–
63
 (
1983
).




Westerblad, H
.,
 D. A. Allen
, &
 J. Lännergren
:
 Muscle fatigue: Lactic acid or inorganic phosphate the major cause?
 News in Physiological Sciences.
 17
:
17
–
21
 (
2002
).




Williams, J. H
.:
 Normal musculoskeletal and neuromuscular anatomy, physiology and responses to training
. In Hasson, S. M. (ed.):
 Clinical Exercise Physiology
.
 St. Louis, MO
:
 Mosby
 (
1994
).




Wilmore, J. H.
:
 Alterations in strength, body composition, and anthropometric measurements consequent to a 10-week weight training program
.
 Medicine and Science in Sports.
 6
:
133
–
138
 (
1974
).




Xin L
,
 R. D. Hyldahl
,
 S. R. Chipkin
, &
 P. M. Clarkson
:
 A contralateral repeated bout effect attenuates induction of NF-κB DNA binding following eccentric exercise
.
 Journal of Applied Physiology.
 116
(
11
):
1473
–
80
 (
2014
).